# source: _OceanofPDF.com_Ancient_Hindu_Astrology_for_the_Modern_Western_Astrologer_-_James_Braha.pdf
# pages: 1-60
# compiled into: interpretation.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 1>>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
16°
Hermetician Press 
ANCIENT 
HINDU 
ASTROLOGY 
FOR THE MODERN 
WESTERN 
ASTROLOGER 
BY JAMES T. BRAHA 

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Cover Design by Rohlni Priya dasa 
 
HERE IS WHAT THE WORLD’S FORE-
MOST ASTROLOGER HAS SAID; 
"This book is not only the best intro-
duction to Hindu astrology that there is, it 
is a superbly written astrology book in it s 
own right. James Braha has done an 
excellent job of making the reasoning 
process of astrology clear to the reader, 
especially considering that it is Hindu 
astrology that he writes about... The book 
fills an enormous gap and fills it well- With 
this book under one’s belt, the others 
begin to make sense. Even the Hindu 
books then become understandable to 
someone who has not had the chance to 
study under an Hindu astrologer. I think 
James T. Braha may have written some-
thing of a masterpiece here!" 
 ROBERT HAND 
ASTROLOGER/AUTHOR 
OTHER REVIEWS 
"This is a book to be warmly welcomed. 
Here finally is a concise and comprehen-
sive text which veiy clearly and effectively 
presents the event oriented astrology of the 
East This is a very important book!" 
ASTROLOGICAL JOURNAI^ ENGLAND 
“This is the clearest exposition of Hindu 
astrology I have ever seen. The book 
deserves to become the classic reference 
on Hindu astrology for Western readers." 
TERESA HAMILTON—INST. EAST WEST 
STUDIES FOR THE MERCURY HOUR 
"This easily-understood reference book 
will be of great help to astrology lovers who 
have previously found the Hindu system 
very hard to grasp...BRAVO!" MARION 
MARCH FOR ASPECTS MAGAZINE 
“James T. Braha’s book deserves to 
become the classic reference on Hindu 
astrology for Western readers. A better 
book could not be written!" KOSMOS 
MAGAZINE—I.SAR

<<<PAGE 3>>>
 
Other Books By James Braha: 
How To Predict Your Future: 
Secrets of Eastern and Western Astrology 
How To Be a Great Astrologer: 
The Planetary Aspects Explained 
Astro-Logos, Revelations of a Hindu Astrologer 
The Art and Practice of Ancient Hindu Astrology: 
Nine Intimate Sessions Between Teacher and Student 
James Braha 
Hermetician Press 
P.O. Box 195 
Longboat Key, Florida 34228 
© 1986 Copyright James Braha 
First paperback edition 1993 
All rights reserved. No part of this text may be reproduced or used in any form 
or by any means—graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, 
mimeographing, or information storage and retrieval systems—without written 
permission from the publisher. A reviewer may quote passages. 
Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 85-81314 ISBN 0-935895-04-3 
Printed in Hong Kong by Liang Yu Printing Factory, Ltd. Mr. Eric Hui (852) 
2560-4453 
11 12 13 14 15 20 25

<<<PAGE 4>>>
 
To my father for his character, 
to Emmett Walz for his selflessness, 
and to Dennis Young (G.H.E.M.H.) for his work in Astrology, 
and his role in alleviating human suffering.

<<<PAGE 5>>>
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Prologue 
vii 
Acknowledgments 
viii 
Introduction 
ix 
WarningxliiiThe 
Hindu 
Zodiac
 
1 
Planetaiy Symbols, Direction Indicators & Body Rulerships 
5 
The Chakra—The Birthchart 
7 
The Navamsa—The One-Ninth Division (Marriage Chart) 
13 
Grahas—The Planets 
The Sun 
17 
The Moon 
19 
Mars 
23 
Mercury 
25 
Jupiter 
27 
Venus 
29 
Saturn 
31 
Rahn and Ketu 
33 
Bhavas—The Horoscope Houses 
37 
Rasis—The Zodiac Signs 
41 
Gaining Perspective of the Hindu System 
43 
Friendships Between Planets 
45 
Planetary Powers 
47 
House Rulerships 
49 
Drishtis— Planetary Aspects 
55 
Shad Bala—Determining Planetary Strengths 
59 
The Effect of Retrograde Planets 
63 
House Karakas—House Indicators 
65 
Kufadosha—Mars Affliction Affecting Married Life 
67 
Upayes—Antidotes for Planetary Afflictions (Gemstones 
and Mantras) 
69 
Planets in the Houses 
77 
1st House—House of the Body 
79 
2nd House—House of Finances 
91

<<<PAGE 6>>>

<<<PAGE 7>>>
 
Planets In the Houses (continued) 
3rd House—House of Siblings 
101 
4th House—House of Happiness and Comforts 
111 
Sth House—House of Children 
121 
6 th House—House of Enemies 
133 
7th House—House of Wife 
143 
8th House—House of Death 
155 
9th House—House of Fortune 
169 
10th House—House of Activities (Occupation) 
183 
11th House—House of Gains and Profits 
195 
12th House—House of Expenditure and Loss 
205 
Vtmsottari Dasa System of Prediction 
217 
Delineation of Dasa Bhuktis—The Planetary Periods 
225 
Transits—Predicting Marriage. Pregnancy, 
Homes & Cars, Etc. 
233 
Maturity of Planets—When Planets Give Their Full Effects 237 
Yogas—Planetary Unions 
239 
Horoscopes of Famous People 
245 
Richard Nixon 
249 
John Lennon 
255 
John F. Kennedy 
263 
Marilyn Monroe 
269 
Lyndon Baines Johnson 
273 
Jackie Onassls 
279 
Wemer Erhard 
281 
Francis Ford Coppola 
285 
Paul Newman 
289 
Mahatma Gandhi 
291 
Muhammed All 
295 
Martin Luther King 
297 
Jimmy Carter 
301 
John Glenn 
305 
Baba Ram Das 
307 
Vargas—The 16 Divisional Charts 
311 
Chaleta Bhava Kundali—The Diurnal Chart 
Predictive Method 
323 
Ashtaka Varga—Eight-fold Division System 
325 
Nakshatras—Lunar Mansions 
331 
Free Will vs. Predestlny 
333 
A Final Note 
335 
Ecclesiastes Excerpt 
337 
Glossaiy 
339 
Bibliography 
347 
Hermetician Press Services 
349

<<<PAGE 8>>>
 
PROLOGUE 
The following conversation took place In 1982, In Benares, India, It is an 
excerpt from the 1st Hindu astrology reading of the author’s life. 
Astrologer: You are going to write some books. 
What!!! 
Astrologer You are going to write some books. 
Are you sure? 
Astrologer Yes. 
J.T.B.: How many? 
Astrologer A few. five or six. 
J.T.B.: Are you sure? 
Astrologer: Yes. 
J.T.B.: But are you sure? I mean are you positive? 
Astrologer: My dear friend, astrology is not an absolute science. 
J.T.B.:Ahhhhhh .......  
Astrologer: But you will write books’

<<<PAGE 9>>>
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I wish to express my gratitude to the following people: To Bob & Mary Jo 
Holtzman for suggesting that this book be written. To Sri R. Santhanam & Sri 
Poputlal M. Padia, my mentors during two separate journeys to New Delhi and 
Bombay; for so graciously sharing their knowledge and experience, I remain 
deeply indebted. To Patricia L. Rogers, for her editing assistance and valuable 
suggestions; to Jane Tobal for all of her time, artwork, support, and spiritual 
vibrations: to Harold Benjamin, for his insights into Stri Jataka—female 
horoscopy, and to my brother Charles whose support has enabled this work to 
be brought out expeditiously. 
To Gopiparanadhana dasa for his Sanskrit translations; to Dravida dasa 
for his valuable grammatical assistance to Rohini Priya dasa and Dhaneshvara 
dasa of ISKCON for their care and artistic expertise in the production of this 
book, as well as for their kindness and sattwa. To Maria Walz for her assistance 
through the difficult days, and astrologer Larry Sands of New Hampshire for his 
inspired classes some years back. And to Mary Beth Farkas, Shirley Chubin, Lilly 
(La Paz) Chilla, Peter Jones, Mary Jane Holt, Daniel Buis, Sheldon Epps, Mike 
Perrie. Kerry Breitbart, Cheryl Goodman, Willis Backus, James Macedo, and Dr. 
Chuck Jacobs.

<<<PAGE 10>>>
 
INTRODUCTION 
Ever since my first journey to India I have desired to share the knowledge 
I was fortunate enough to receive. I have also felt a need to dispel some rather 
major misconceptions, the main one being the fact that Hindu astrology is 
extraordinarily difficult. This is not true, as will soon hopefully be revealed. 
Although I have always been most fascinated with astrology because of 
the philosophical implications and revelations which can be extracted, I have 
done my best to keep philosophy from this work, as that is not my present 
purpose. It is my intention only to present Hindu astrology in a way that it 
deserves to be presented, which is long overdue—a way which Western 
astrologers can understand and utilize, and which will clear away the mystery 
and finally put into perspective the enormously complex techniques which make 
up the bulk of most textbooks on the subject. 
Having worked with both the Hindu and Western systems, it is my 
experience that the two greatly complement each other and together form the 
basis for a complete and profound astrology. For the many past centuries the 
two diverse astrological methodologies have remained separated. As the world 
now approaches the new age (of Aquarius), where the science of the stars will be 
a prevalent discipline, great leaps and bounds, indeed breakthroughs, in 
astrology are rapidly being made. It is my belief that we are now at one of the 
most fascinating junctures in the history of this science, a point in time when 
differences shall begin to merge and dissolve and the two systems will come 
together. 
It is perfectly appropriate that for all this time the Western world has been 
satisfied with an astrology which excels in delineating character disposition, 
talents, abilities, and possibilities. Western culture is steeped in the philosophy 
of free will, where man may do what he will with what he was bom with, the 
extent of success and its trappings being dependent only upon how far the 
individual is willing to go to realize his desires. On the other hand, the Hindus 
have for several thousands of years worked with their predictive system, which 
fortells more than anything else the events and circumstances of a person’s life. 
This is only natural in view of Indian life, where there has existed a caste system 
which has determined that the son of a servant shall also be a servant and a 
merchant’s son shall always be a merchant More than that, India has for so long 
been so terribly impoverished that unless one is bom wealthy, there

<<<PAGE 11>>>
 
Is, as perhaps only one who has seen India firsthand may know, almost no 
possible way to rise above the circumstances one is bom under— unless, that is, 
destiny as revealed in the stars determines otherwise. 
And so it is that Hindu predictive astrology is perhaps 95% concerned with 
a person’s fame, fortune, wealth, etc., and 5% with his personality, motivation, 
and psychology. Explanations or answers to the whys and wherefores of a 
person's life are essentially nonexistent. There is no delineation of what path one 
must undertake in order to learn specific lessons or further his evolution. Rather 
contrary to what Westerners might think, our Western astrology is more 
“spiritual” while the ancient Hindu system is more mundane. And interestingly, 
the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, which are so prominent in 
Western astrology and which many consider nature's instruments helping to 
bring about the new age. are unnecessary in this predictive work and are widely 
ignored in India. However, in terms of consistently and accurately delineating 
events, circumstances, and periods in a person’s life, nothing compares to Hindu 
astrology. It is simply marvelous. It is especially helpful to Western astrologers 
in confirming or specifying exactly what a transit or progression may be revealing 
and whether it is indicating an internal occurrence or something in the outer 
world. For as far as external events are concerned, much less goes on in a 
person’s life unaccounted for in this predictive system than in Western astrology. 
There are now those in the East who are captivated by Western astrology, 
and It is simply a matter of time before our system takes its rightful place next 
to the square-shaped Indian horoscope. For in the same way that Westerners are 
now familiar with and believing in karma and predestiny, and wanting to know 
their fate, Indians are escaping their caste system and questioning their age old 
traditions. They are also asserting their own individual wills more than ever 
before. For these and whatever other reasons, ancient Hindu predictive astrology 
and the more modem Western system are about to be used together, and the 
result is greater efficiency, accuracy, and knowledge for all concerned. 
Hindu astrology is not intrinsically more difficult than Western astrology. 
It may appear so because a seemingly infinite number of rules and astrological 
techniques have been developed by the Indians. This is of course natural for a 
society over 6,000 years old whose elders have not only employed astrology but 
embraced it. These time-consuming techniques and complexities present an 
opportunity rather than a hindrance, and when kept in perspective they allow 
for more subtlety, accuracy, and the privilege to go deeper into the work. With 
this in mind, a great deal of care has gone into the presentation of the material 
in this book. It is felt that most books on this subject have unwittingly kept 
Westerners faithfully away! This is also largely due to most Hindu authors’ lack 
of understanding of the Western mind, as well as perhaps their lack of dexterity

<<<PAGE 12>>>
 
with the English language. And in the very few cases of books on Hindu astrology 
by Western authors, the problem has been too much focus on extraneous, 
detailed techniques, with precious little emphasis on the essentials. The result 
has been mass confusion to the uninitiated. 
While a good many of the unnecessary complexities have been dis- 
criminatively omitted from this book, it is hoped that the reader will be able to 
establish enough of a working basis with the system to proceed further, and if 
desired, to even take on the almost endless maze of Hindu delineations that 
indeed exist. For Hindu astrology is so unlimited in its scope that this book is in 
a sense merely a beginning or an eye opener. And yet it contains all the essentials 
necessary to learn to uncover the fate of a person in regards to his outer 
circumstances and events. It is my wish that Western astrologers will take this 
work, embrace it, and further investigate and explore the use of Hindu predictive 
astrology alongside our modem system. It is, in my view, a very exciting 
proposition. If in the years to come, more books such as this are written by 
Westerners and appear in the marketplace, then this work will have achieved its 
purpose. 
January. 1986

<<<PAGE 13>>>

<<<PAGE 14>>>
 
WARNING! 
Because Hindu astrology Is the art of predicting actual events and 
circumstances in a person's life, it is by its very nature a rather intense and 
consequential proposition. It is therefore especially less appropriate to learn the 
practice from a book than from an experienced astrologer. And because the 
results of delineation are factual, greater precision is essential. Thus the 
astrological “cook book” approach, where all elements are broken down 
separately and interpreted as an end in themselves, falls short and leaves a good 
deal to be desired. However, since this is the medium at hand, all that can be 
done is to present the material and issue a stem caution regarding its proper use. 
First of all, it must be clearly understood that although any one particular 
condition in a birthchart may reveal quite a definite and predictable effect, this 
aspect must absolutely be balanced with the enormous amount of other variables 
present. One need only consider that there are some 4 billion souls on the earth, 
each leading a different life, to realize the great variety of astrological 
combinations that must exist. Hindu astrology is, much more so than the 
Western system, a process of weighing the positive and negative forces attached 
to each specific issue. For example, if there are 3 or 4 strong indications of fame 
deduced from 10th house analysis but the ascendant is badly afflicted, then the 
likelihood of acclaim is reduced to perhaps a 70-80% chance. Also, in this work 
there will often be a mixture of extreme indications, which demand both time and 
experience with the system before one may be able to draw the correct 
conclusions. For instance, if, in analyzing a person's mother, it is noted that the 
Moon is in its highest degree of exaltation but the 4th house is badly marred, 
then the mother may be fabulously wealthy, beautiful, and long-lived, but the 
person’s relationship with her might be worthless at best. Or she could be very 
poor and die early but be an exceptionally positive influence in the person's life. 
The possibilities are of course as limitless as life Itself. And although this author 
likes to believe that astrology is a scientific system, it must be acknowledged that 
the most accurate and profound “readings” experienced in India were by those 
who had been practicing for 15 or 20 years and clearly applied the use of intuition 
to their craft. 
In describing the effects of different astrological Indications in this text, 
statements are frequently made in a decidedly definite and unqualified manner. 
This is simply the way of Hindu astrology, the way of scrip-

<<<PAGE 15>>>
 
 
tural teachings. Because Hindu astrology deals with actual occurrences, the 
writings are given In this way in order to empower the astrologer to comfortably 
make predictions. Therefore these statements of fact serve a functional purpose, 
even though each delineation is realistically perhaps only a possibility or a 
potential. It is strongly advised, then, that one not take eveiy delineation to be 
“written in stone”, at least until some degree of experience is gained. The task at 
hand in the beginning days is to glean the essence of each particular 
interpretation. If this advice is not heeded, there is a strong probability of going 
overboard with predictions, not to mention the fears that will be embedded in 
one's mind. For without a doubt nearly anyone analyzing his own horoscope 
through the use of the section titled "Planets in the Houses,” will read that either 
his spouse, sibling, mother, or father “may suffer or die early". It must be 
understood that these are simply written words which hopefully point in the 
direction of the truth, but which take on no life or power without the conscious-
ness and intelligence of an experienced astrologer who has taken all factors into 
account. And even then, of course, the greatest humility and broadmindedness 
are required by the practitioner, for who in this work is without error? !! 
There is another issue which, though not exclusive to Hindu astrology, is 
important to address lest the astrologer run into frustration. This is the matter 
of having a person disagree with what the birthchart has revealed about his past. 
This occurs at times simply because of the relativity of viewpoints. In other words, 
when a person is told, for example, that the horoscope reveals that his mother 
has led a life of hardship, he may flatly deny the claim. If the astrologer has 
properly made his analysis, what usually occurs is that the truth eventually 
shows up that the statement has been on the mark. However, the person perhaps 
could not agree because his idea of a "life of hardship" is not the same as the 
astrologer’s. Therefore, it sometimes happens that information about the past is 
simply pointless to mention, though it may be especially beneficial to the 
counseling astrologer. Although this occurrence is no more typical than what 
happens in Western astrological counseling, it is rather more disconcerting, 
because since what has been delineated is factual, one may find it absurd that 
the person cannot or will not remember or acknowledge certain central 
circumstances in his life. And though the burden of proof of course lies with the 
astrologer, experience has shown that this art is extremely reliable when 
practiced properly. 
In India there are several different systems of astrology in use. The most 
popular by far is Parasara, and this is the one given in this book. Two other 
systems which one may wish to study are Jaimtni and Tajaka. However, these 
are complete within themselves and should not be in any way combined with 
Parasara. 
In all ancient Hindu texts, delineations are made with reference to
xiv

<<<PAGE 16>>>
 
men except when chapters are specifically devoted to “female horoscopy." In this 
book the pronoun “his" is employed, but only for the sake of ease of writing. 
Certainly no disrespect to women is intended, especially since at this time 
astrology seems to be more appreciated by them! Regarding female horoscopy, it 
is a field which seems to have been designed for men, since what is analyzed is 
a woman's virtue, chastity, and suitability as a wife. It is an entire system and 
not within the scope of this book. 
Finally, it may be reiterated that Hindu astrology employs more 
techniques in its basic analysis than the Western system. And it is crucial to 
consider all such elements before making any predictions. The na- vamsa or 
l/9th divisional chart, is essential, and any Indian astrologer making a prediction 
without its use merely gives away his ignorance and amateur status. Concerning 
the section on "Planets in the Houses" one must especially note whether the 
planet involved is in the house of a friend or an enemy. This will most definitely 
affect the result in a positive or negative way. Western astrologers used to a 
system with less basic variables may be prone to make hurried judgements, and 
the words of P.M. Padia (one of the author's mentors) may be helpful. Indians 
over time have developed a delicious and veiy special-tasting tea called chai. Sri 
Padia, after explaining the many different facets which would lead him to make 
a particularly accurate prediction, was fond of saying this: “My dear friend, chat 
is not simply water, sugar, and milk. It is a mixture of many herbs and spices, 
all delicately balanced." Many indeed!
xu

<<<PAGE 17>>>
 
WITH KNOWLEDGE COMES POWER. 
THERE IS NO GREATER TEST. 
THEREFORE USE THIS KNOWLEDGE WISELY.

<<<PAGE 18>>>
 
THE HINDU ZODIAC 
There is a fundamental difference between the zodiac used in Hindu 
astrology and the one used in the Western system. A zodiac Is an imaglnaiy 
sphere encircling the heavens, inside of which the Sun, Moon, and planets travel 
in their orbits. This circular space is divided into 12 equal parts of 30 degrees 
each, known as the zodiac signs. At one time these signs corresponded to actual 
fixed star constellations. However, due to the precession of the equinox, which 
moves at a mean or approximate rate of 50 1/4 seconds per year or 1 degree 
every 70 years, the same connection no longer exists. At this point, after so many 
years of this slight movement, there Is a difference of about 23 degrees between 
the constellations and the signs with the same names. Therefore, when a 
Westerner refers to the Sun being in 15 degrees of Libra, for instance, the 
statement is technically inaccurate, because the Sun, after being backed up 23 
degrees, would actually reside in Virgo. 
The system which Western astrologers use, which is unrelated to the 
constellations, is called the tropical zodiac. The older and more traditional zodiac 
employed by the Hindus, where there is no difference between a star constellation 
and the sign name given to it, is called the sidereal zodiac. The way the 
constellations are kept track of, to account for this slow but constant movement, 
is to cumulatively subtract the approximate 50  1/4 seconds from the longitudes 
of the planets each year. 
Now that it is gathered that the Hindus use a “real" zodiac and Westerners 
a symbolic one, an Important question naturally arises. Which zodiac produces 
the most accurate and predictable results? Since both methods have withstood 
the test of time, one need not jump to any hasty or fanatical conclusion that 
either is necessarily superior to the other, especially since it is certainly possible 
to arrive at the same end through radically different means. It is also possible 
that each system is geared towards delineating its own specifically desired 
results. And this, in the author’s view, seems to be the case. The Hindus' “real” 
zodiac analyzes actual events and circumstances destined to occur by virtue of 
one’s past actions, and the Westerners' symbolic one reveals one's experience of 
those occurrences as well as basic personality traits. 
That both zodiacs are quite workable is easily ascertained through 
practical experience in either method. Therefore, the reader should appre-

<<<PAGE 19>>>
 
elate the accuracy, beauty, and profundity of both systems and simply make 
space for any paradox which may perhaps exist. Western readers are cautioned 
against making hasty judgements about the meaning of the fact that all planets 
in a tropical horoscope are backed up 23 degrees (approximately) to arrive at the 
sidereal birthchart. This apparently means that since a person’s Sun, Moon, and 
ascendant may now occupy different signs, all character traits which have already 
been accurately described will now completely change because of sidereal 
delineations. Such Is absolutely not the case, for the truth is, even though the 
signs In the sidereal zodiac are labeled with the same basic characteristics as 
those of the tropical system, there Is practically no mention of personality in a 
Hindu astrological reading! Hindu predictive astrology allows one to do exactly 
what its name Implies, and that Is to predict! It does not in any serious way 
attempt to reveal the kind of in-depth character analysis Western astrology so 
excels In. 
At this point there is an even greater complexity which must be dealt with. 
This is the matter of the ayanamsa (pronounced alya- namsha). The ayanamsa 
is the longitudinal difference between the two zodiacs—in other words, the 
difference between the 1st degree of the actual constellation Aries and the 
beginning of the the sign Arles as considered In the tropical zodiac. This figure is 
critical, for in order to locate the planetary positions of.the sidereal zodiac, this 
measurement must be subtracted from the longitudes given for the planets In the 
tropical ephemeris. Since it is known exactly how fast this precession of the equi-
nox moves, the only question is at what time did the 2 zodiacs coincide with each 
other. It is known that the zodiacs are together every 26,000 years, but there are 
any number of differing opinions as to when this last occurred. 
The determination of this event is a complicated matter and not within 
the scope of this work. Suffice it to say that most astrologers agree that the zodiacs 
were at one with each other sometime around AD. 200- 600. Therefore the most 
widely accepted measurement for the ayanamsa Is somewhere between 19—25 
degrees for the year 1950. Although several ayanamsas have been proposed, the 
Indian government has for some time officially sanctioned the work of N.C, Lahiri. 
Since this author has tried several various measurements and found great 
success with the traditional Lahiri findings and none with the others, it is his 
ayanamsa that is used in this book and advised for the readers. However, some 
different ayanamsas will be given below. 
The easiest way to test the accuracy of the various ayanamsas is through 
the use of the Vtmsottarl dasa system of prediction given further on in this book. 
The dasa system is a means of prediction which divides a person's life into 
periods, which are each governed by a particular planet. These periods, or dasas, 
are based upon the degree of the Moon’s

<<<PAGE 20>>>
 
position at birth, and a mere 2 or 3 degree difference can cause the starting date 
of a dasa to vary by as much as 4 or 5 years in certain instances. 
The ayanamsa Is obviously of utmost importance, since aside from its 
effect on planetary periods, the horoscope in many cases will be dramatically 
altered by this crucial measurement. Therefore astrologers may want to draw their 
own conclusions as to which one to use. It is hoped that they will rely on 
experience with the results each ayanamsa produces in actual birthcharts, rather 
than theories, concepts, and findings based upon weather changes and 
atmospheric conditions, etc., as some have done. Unfortunately, it cannot be 
overstated that each person professing a different measurement swears 
vehemently about the veracity of his finding. Even more disconcerting is the fact 
that nearly all make cases for their ayanamsa based upon the accuracy of 
delineated horoscopes. 
Below are 3 of the most respected opinions for the ayanamsa on January 
1st, 1950. In order to discern the ayanamsa for a date other than what has been 
given, simply add 48 seconds (the approximate rate at which the precession of 
equinoxes is currently moving In Its 26,000-year cycle) for each year after 1950, 
or subtract the same figure for years preceding 1950. Or a Lahiri ephemeris can 
of course be purchased (refer to bibliography). Also, there are computer programs 
for Hindu astrology which give a choice of several different ayanamsas. 
THREE WIDELY ACCEPTED AYANAMSAS FOR JANUARY 1 st. 1950 
N.C. Lahiri (government of India) 23 degrees, 9 minutes B.V. 
Raman 
21 degrees, 42 minutes 
Fagan—Bradley 
24 degrees. 2 minutes 
LAHIRI AYANAMSAS FOR DIFFERENT YEARS 
January 1, 1900 22° 27' 59" 
January 
1, 
1910 
22°35'51" 
January 1, 1920 22° 44' 43" 
January 1, 1930 22° 52' 40" 
January 1. 1940 23° 01'21" 
January 
1, 
1950 
23’09'34" 
January 1, 1960 23° 17'54" 
January 1, 1970 23° 26'21" 
January 1.1980 23° 34'31" 
Note: Although Lahiri’s ayanamsa produces excellent results, 1 am also impressed 
with astrologer Krishnamurti's work. His ayanamsa for 1-1-1950 is 23’ 3' 58". This is 
only about 6 MINUTES earlier than Lahiri’s and consistently causes dasas and bhuktis 
to begin 45 days earlier than Lahiri's ayanamsa. Astrologers may experiment.

<<<PAGE 21>>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PLANETARY SYMBOLS 
5 
____________________________________________ PLANETARY DIRECTIONS 
Planets and signs represent certain directions and may be useful in 
determining favorable areas for a person to reside. 
PLANETARY SYMBOLS 
SIGN SYMBOLS 

<<<PAGE 22>>>
 
 
Malefic or fallen planets will harm the part of the body corresponding to 
the sign or house placement occupied. Please note that in Hindu astrology the 
heart and stomach are not ruled by the same signs and houses as those in the 
Western system. 
 
 
__________________________________________________ BODY RULERSHIPS 
SIGN HOUSE PART OF BODY SIGN HOUSE PART OF BODY 

<<<PAGE 23>>>
 
In India there are 2 different horoscope formats, one more widely used in the 
south and one more popular in the north. The figures have no effect on the results 
of delineation and are simply a matter of tradition. In this book it is the south Indian 
method which is employed. 
Contrary to the Western birthchart, where the ascendant (i.e., 1st house) is 
fixed in the Eastern section of the map and signs rotate, in the Hindu chart the 
reverse is the case. Signs always correspond to the same squares, and the 
ascendant, which is noted by a diagonal line, is placed in the appropriate sign. Also 
at odds with the Western horoscope is the fact that houses are counted in a 
clockwise direction rather than counterclockwise. Shown below is a sample 
horoscope with the ascendant in Taurus. In this chart the signs have been labeled 
in their appropriate spaces, however these symbols are ordinarily omitted, since 
this format is so easily memorized. Since the ascendant is Taurus, Aries represents 
the 12th house while Gemini indicates the 2nd. Also, it should be mentioned that 
Hindus do not use symbols for the planets but. the words Sun, Moon, etc. Nor do 
they write in the degrees but rather keep those figures on paper nearby. However, 
for delineation purposes it is easier and more efficient to Include the degrees. Also, 
Western astrologers will find it more, comfortable to use planetary symbols rather 
than words. 
HOUSE SYSTEMS 
It is the equal house system that is most widely used in India, but not exactly 
the same method as that known in the West. The equal house
THE CHAKRA—THE BIRTHCHART 
7 
South Indian
North Indian

<<<PAGE 24>>>
 
 
system known to Western astrologers is the method where the houses begin 
exactly 30 degrees apart from each other, starting with the ascendant degree. The 
Hindu equal house system also uses the exact 30 degree separations, but it is not 
the ascendant degree which begins the house. 
There are actually 2 different methods used, which will now be explained. 
The 1st technique, the ancient and more traditional way, considers the entire 
house containing the ascendant degree to be the 1st house. Therefore, no 
discrimination of degrees exists at all. For example, if the ascendant is 2 degrees 
or 28 degrees of Taurus, then any planet in that same sign is taken to be in the 
1st house. Likewise then, a planet in any part of Gemini would be considered in 
the 2nd house, etc., etc. This method, though it may seem extremely unspecific 
and imperfect to the Westerner actually produces very fine results and is preferred 
by this author and recommended to the reader. 
The 2nd method called equal house system, which is currently in vogue 
(and was used by this author for the first 2 years with Hindu astrology), is more 
specific in separating houses and therefore closer to the Western technique. In 
this system the ascendant degree is considered the middle of the house. Thus, 
any planet within 15 degrees on either side of this point is also in the 1st house. 
Therefore a planet may be in a different sign and yet still be in the 1st house. For 
example, if the ascendant is 10 degrees Taurus, then any planet up to 25 degrees 
Taurus occupies the 1st. Also, any planet behind the 10 degree point as far back 
as 25 .degrees Aries is also in the 1st. With this method, once the beginning of the 
1st house is found, the rest of the houses follow in 30 degree intervals. For 
example, if 25° Aries to 25° Taurus marks the 1st house, then 25° Taurus to 25° 
Gemini marks the 2nd, and so on. However, the lord of the the 1st house in this 
case is taken to be Venus, the ruler of Taurus, even though the 1st house begins 
at 25 degrees Aries. 
Because a more definite actual distinction exists from constellation

<<<PAGE 25>>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
to constellation (i.e„ sign to sign), delineation through the ancient house system 
will produce results which are more accurate and of the essence than the modem 
technique. However, the newer technique has also lasted for some time because 
it too gives predictable effects. Therefore many Hindu astrologers actually use 
both systems but rely more heavily on the ancient method. It is not that they 
analyze the birthchart twice, but both techniques are kept in mind. For instance, 
in the horoscope above, an astrologer would consider Jupiter to be in the 1st 
house but realize that it might have a recognizable effect on 2nd house affairs 
also. Though this may seem confusing to the beginner, it is actually rather simple 
once a certain amount of time and experience with the system have been gained. 
In any case, it is advised that for the time being one use only the more traditional 
system. And that is the method which will be focused on in this book. One 
important word of caution, however, is necessary. An error in a person’s birth 
time of 4 minutes will move the ascendant 1 degree. In those horoscopes where 
the ascendant occupies an extremely early or late degree, the entire horoscope 
will be thrown off if the ascendant changes signs. Therefore when analyzing such 
birthcharts it is essential to determine the correctness of the ascendant. This is 
generally done quite easily by simply finding the most afflicted or well-disposed 
house and questioning the client about those particular significations. If the 
delineation fits, then one may proceed without concern. 
SETTING UP THE HOROSCOPE 
The procedure for drawing up the birthchart from scratch is complicated 
and unnecessary to deal with here, since it is found in so many basic textbooks. 
What is now shown is how to transpose the Western horoscope to the Hindu 
chakra. Therefore it is necessary to obtain an accurately drawn horoscope based 
on one’s time and place of birth (for those who do not possess one, a 
computerized horoscope service providing Western or Hindu birthcharts is 
offered at the back of this book). Any house system will suffice, since it is only 
the ascendant and planetary positions that are needed. All that must be done is 
to find the ayanamsa for the date of birth and subtract that measurement from 
the ascendant and all planets. The ayanamsas are given on page 3. The 
horoscope of Richard Nixon is given below as an example. 
BIRTH DATA FOR RICHARD NIXON
Jan. 9, 1913,9:35 P.M., P.S.T.
long. 117.49, lat 33.59
TROPICAL 
ZODIAC 
POSITIONS 

<<<PAGE 26>>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The easiest way to proceed with the necessary calculations is to first 
reduce the sign degrees of each item to its proper degree within the 360 degree 
zodiac. Therefore the following table may be helpful. 
Aries 
Taurus 
Gemini 
Cancer 
Leo 
Virgo Libra 
Scorpio 
Sagittarius 
Capricorn 
Aquarius 
Pisces 
0“—29“ 59' 30’—
59“ 59' 60’—89“ 
99' 90°—119’59' 
120’—149“ 59' 
150’—179’59' 
180’—209’ 59' 
210“—239’59' 
240’—269“ 59' 
270’—299’59' 
300’—329’59'
330’—360“
The ayanamsa for this birthdate is 22 degrees 38 minutes. This 
measurement must be subtracted from the tropical zodiac positions to arrive at 
the sidereal figures. 
EXAMPLES
The Sun—
= 289° 24' minus 22° 38' = 266° 46' =
 
The Moon—
= 320° 08' minus 22° 38' = 297° 30' =
 
Rahu (north node)—
(add 360 since 22° 38' cannot be subtracted 
from 07° 15').= 367° 15' minus 22° 38' = 344° 37' =
 

<<<PAGE 27>>>
 

<<<PAGE 28>>>
THE NAVAMSA—THE ONE-NINTH DIVISION 
(MARRIAGE CHART) 
In Hindu astrology the horoscope may be broken down Into several vargas, 
or divisions. Although as many as 16 basic divisional charts exist, most 
astrologers only concern themselves with the navamsa (pronounced navamsha) 
or 1/9 division. Each varga chart relates to a certain house, and this one 
corresponds to the 7th, the house of marriage. However, because the 7th is the 
opposite of the 1st. which is the most personal part of a horoscope, it has to do 
with a person's relationship to society and all its functions. Therefore the 
nauamsa is of great importance, and no professional Hindu astrologer will 
attempt to analyze a birthchart without it 
Although astrologers consult the nauamsa for specific details of married 
life, the chart is mainly used for its impact on a person’s life in general, for this 
chart carries a good deal of power to affect the actual birthchart. For example, if 
4 or 5 planets in the naramsa are exalted, or in their own signs, the original 
horoscope is tremendously strengthened in a recognizable way. Naturally, if 
many planets are fallen in this divisional chart, the opposite results would occur. 
Also, nearly all Hindu scriptures are emphatic about the fact that if a planet is 
exalted in the birthchart but fallen in the navamsa. then the particular effects of 
that planet will be extremely mixed, and in that planet’s dasa (planetary period—
discussed on page 217) some amount of misery must be reaped. It should also 
be mentioned that the Hindu scriptures are replete with planetary combinations 
and formulas involving this varga. One such basic and easily noted condition is 
what is known as vargothamamsa, or vargottama. This occurs when a planet in 
the navamsa occupies the same sign as its horoscope placement This is a 
beneficial situation, and Hindu scriptures state that the planet will give results 
similar to those given when posited in its own sign. A planet in its fallen sign, 
being vargottama, is of course only worse off. 
One must bear in mind, however, that the navamsa is not an actual 
horoscope but a calculated one based upon the original. Therefore aspects and 
conjunctions in this chart should never be used, despite the fact that some 
astrologers attempt to do so. Also, planets are posited in signs in the navamsa, 
but there are no degrees for them. 
The navamsa is essentially used to color the actual horoscope. There is no 
question that specific results can be delineated from the proper use of the chart, 
but the conditions revealed must be balanced

<<<PAGE 29>>>
 
with the natal horoscope. For example, if Jupiter is fallen in the 10th house of 
the navamsa, one may expect disturbances in the person’s career. However, the 
intensity of difficulties will depend upon the condition of the 10th house of the 
actual birthchart. 
There is one consideration, especially for Westerners, which must be 
taken quite seriously. And that is that when a 30 degree sign is divided into 9 
parts, each one is only 3 degrees 20 minutes. Therefore since 1 degree equals 4 
minutes of arc, an error of 13 minutes in the birthtime throws this chart 
completely off. In many cases a mere 4 or 5 minute discrepancy will give a wrong 
ascendant for the navamsa. Thus, it is Inappropriate to use the houses in the 
navamsa unless one is certain the birthtime is exact, or unless events proving 
the accuracy of the divisional chart have been witnessed. But although the 
houses may be inaccurate due to an improper birthtime; the planets in signs will 
not be affected. Therefore even if one is not positive the birthtime is exact, there 
is still great value in knowing what signs the planets occupy in the navamsa. 
 
 
SETTING UP THE NAVAMSA 
First, 30 degrees are divided into 9 parts. These numbers can easily be 
memorized in time.

<<<PAGE 30>>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DEGREES 
0° 00—3® 20' 3° 
20—6° 40' 6° 40 
—10° 00' 10° 00 
— 13° 20 13° 20 
—16° 40' 16° 
40—20° 00' 20° 
00'—23° 20' 23° 
20 —26° 40' 
26° 40—30° 00' 
gets 
1 navamsa 
gets 2 nauamsas 
gets 3 naramsas 
gets4 
navamsas 
gets 5 nauamsas 
gets 6 navamsas 
gets 7 nauamsas 
gets 8 navamsas 
gets 9 navamsas 
Using Richard Nixons planetary positions, the number of parts to be 
used will be determined. 
SIDEREAL (HINDU) ZODIAC POSITIONS 
Ascendant 
Sun Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu Ketu 
count 8 navamsas 
count 9 navamsas 
count 9 navamsas 
count 3 navamsas
count 3 navamsas 
count 3 navamsas 
count 4 navamsas 
count 2 navamsas
count 4 navamsas
count  4 nauamsas 
The next step is to note the element of the sign each planet occupies. 
• Navamsas of planets in fire signs
are counted from Aries. 
• Na vamsas of planets i n earth signs
are counted from Capricorn. 
• Navamsas of planets in air signs
are counted from Libra. 
• Navamsas of planets in water signs
are counted from Cancer. 
For example, Venus, which occupies an air sign, gets 4 navamsas which 
are counted from Libra. Therefore Venus is placed in Capricorn, the 4 th house 
from Libra. 
NAVAMSA CHART FOR RICHARD NIXON 

<<<PAGE 31>>>
RAVI—THE SUN 
 
 
The Sun, because of its intense heat, is a malefic planet in Hindu 
astrology. It does not destroy its associations quite as badly as Mars and Saturn, 
but it is essentially a harmful influence. Also because of its heat, any planet that 
is posited within 8 degrees of the Sun is burnt up or absorbed by its rays. This 
condition is called combustion, and it effectively spoils the conjoined planet and 
whatever houses it rules. Regarding the 8 degree orb assigned to combustion, 
individual astrologers may wish to determine their own orb of influence, but in 
any case, combustion must never be ignored. 
While the Sun is considered the most significant factor in Western 
astrology, such is not the case in the Hindu system. The assigned significations 
for the Sun are basically the same in Hindu astrology, but the Moon takes top 
priority since it, more than anything else, is responsible for the overall happiness 
and general well-being of a person. The Sun, however, is very important since it 
governs a person's confidence, authority, power, and status. It also rules the 
father and has a great deal to do with career and the person's worldly activities. 
The Sun rules the soul and is therefore called the atmakaraka, or soul 
indicator. As such, the conditions and surroundings of the Sun will reveal 
tendencies and affinities which are extremely fundamental to the person. It 
should be mentioned that there are often references made to the atmakaraka in 
the Hindu scriptures. But it must be determined which one is being referred to, 
since there are two. The planet in the latest degree in a horoscope (i.e„ a planet 
in 28—29 degrees) is also an atmakaraka. 
The negative effects of the Sun are somewhat easily altered when the Sun 
is aspected by a benefic. Therefore, when aspected by Venus, Jupiter, or the 
Moon, the Sun will produce rather beneficial results. Also, as all planets have 
certain house placements where their energy is more compatible, so it is that the 
Sun produces excellent results in the upachaya. or growing houses (3rd, 6th, 
10th, and 11th). where maleflcs are welcomed. The best placement for the Sun 
is the 10th house, where it receives dik bala, or directional strength. It also 
functions at its optimum in Aries, its exalted, or uchcha, sign. It is weakest in 
Libra, its fallen, or neecha sign. And it gives very good results in Leo. its 
swakshetra, or own house. 
The Sun is masculine in gender. And as has already been menti-

<<<PAGE 32>>>
 
oned, it is hot, dry, and malefic. Another name of the Sun is Surya. The friends 
who welcome the Sun in their houses are the Moon, Mars, and Jupiter. Venus 
and Saturn are enemies, while Mercury is neutral to the Sun. The gem to wear to 
strengthen an afflicted Sun is a red ruby. The metals gold and copper are also of 
benefit to a weak Sun. 
INDICATIONS OF THE SUN 
• 
father 
• 
the soul, ego 
• 
power, ambition 
• 
vitality, dignity. Self-reliance 
• 
authority or rulership position 
• 
government 
• 
vocation 
• 
professional status, position, popularity 
• 
physicians, chemists, druggists 
• 
the eyes, vision 
• 
the heart 
• 
copper, gold 
• 
eastern direction 
• 
Sunday 
• 
red ruby 
• 
the color gold 

<<<PAGE 33>>>
CHANDRA—THE MOON
 
 
The Moon is the single most important influence in Hindu astrology. In 
significance it is equal to or greater than the ascendant. If one understands the reasoning 
behind the great emphasis on the Moon, then the gist of this system can be gotten, for 
the Moon rules peace of mind, comforts, and the general well being and fortune of a 
person. Unlike Western astrology where the Sun is the most vital concern, the focus in 
this system is not on a person's deeply ingrained tendencies and affinities, his will power, 
authority, and ability. It is rather on the benefits he reaps, i.e„ his comforts, ease of life, 
affluence, fame, etc. This is the crux of Hindu astrology. Therefore if the Moon is weak or 
afflicted, success becomes rather difficult to achieve and happiness and a comfortable 
life on earth may never be known to the person. 
In terms of rulerships, the Moon governs, among other things, the mother, 
females, the emotional life, and the public. It also rules growth and, perhaps for this 
reason, has much to do with the health during childhood. Persons with an afflicted Moon 
are generally weak or sickly in their early years. The Moon also rules the mind, but more 
in the way of common sense and peace of mind vs. intellect. And memory is a function 
of the Moon. Perhaps the most important point to remember is that the Moon contributes 
more to the overall tenor of the horoscope than any other factor except possibly the 
ascendant. 
It cannot be overemphasized that the Moon’s house position must never be 
ignored or underestimated. The significations of that particular house are natural, 
comfortable, and vital facets of the life. The placement of the Moon is thus one of the 
most consistent indicators of where a person will play out his karma, and it is often 
rather helpful when trying to determine what profession a person may choose. 
Because the Moon is such an essential factor, the next step after analyzing the 
horoscope in the traditional way is to review the chart, ignoring the ascendant and 
considering the Moon’s position as the 1st house. This is known as Chandra lagna 
(literally Moon ascendant) and is not in fact a separate procedure but something Hindu 
astrologers keep in mind while delineating the horoscope. This technique is not perhaps 
so definite in its revelations but will give added weight or shading to what the actual 
horoscope indicates. 
 

<<<PAGE 34>>>
Another Hindu delineation indicative of the significance of this luminary 
is the effect of surrounding planets on the Moon. It is highly desirable, in fact 
necessary, that the Moon not be isolated in the horoscope. There should be 
planets either conjunct or in the house preceding or following the Moon, or both. 
It is of course better that these planets not be malefics, although even those are 
better than no planets at all. Otherwise, if the Moon is segregated, there will be 
disturbance of mind and less good fortune, and the ability to reap fame or 
recognition in life is marred. 
Aside from the fact that the Moon takes precedence over the Sun, there is 
another major difference between Hindu and Western astrology concerning the 
Moon. And that is that it is crucial to determine whether the Moon was waxing 
or waning at birth. This is because the waxing Moon is considered a beneflc, while 
the waning Moon is malefic However, there is a subtlety to this matter in that a 
Moon that Is waxing or getting brighter may have just passed its new Moon and 
therefore still be quite dim. Likewise, a waning Moon that is on its way to 
darkness may have just finished its full Moon point and still be extremely bright. 
So discretion must be used in this matter. But the two points which must be 
remembered are that there is a veiy real qualitative difference between a waxing 
Moon and a waning Moon, the latter being malefic and the former benefic, and 
that the brighter the Moon, the more powerful is its effect, while the more dim it 
is, the weaker. It must also be realized that a bright Moon in its house placement 
and aspects gives effects on a par with Jupiter in its intensity. Therefore, the full 
Moon, which in Western astrology is an extremely difficult influence (known as 
the Sun opposite Moon aspect), in Hindu astrology is one of the most favorable 
and auspicious of all astrological conditions. 
To distinguish if the Moon is waxing or waning at birth is an easy matter. 
Since the Moon travels faster than the Sun, simply note in the horoscope whether 
the Moon is moving towards its opposition point from the Sun. If so, then it is 
waxing, or getting brighter. If It has reached its opposition with the Sun and is 
moving towards the conjunction, then it is waning, or getting darker. 
The Moon is cold, moist and feminine. It is best placed in Taurus, where 
it is exalted, and most poorly placed in Scorpio, its fallen sign. The Moon rules 
Cancer and gives very good results in that sign. It receives dik bala, or directional 
strength, in the 4th house, where it gives excellent results. The friends who 
welcome the Moon in their houses are the Sun and Mercury. The rest of the 
planets are neutral to the Moon. There are no enemies. Another name for the 
Moon is Soma. Pearls or silver may be worn to strengthen a weak, waning, or 
afflicted Moon.

<<<PAGE 35>>>
 
 
INDICATIONS OF THE MOON 
• 
mother 
• 
females 
• 
the mind, common sense, memory 
• 
the public, mass consciousness 
• 
emotions 
• 
general well-being (affluence, fortune, recognition & fame) 
• 
fluctuations, moodiness, instability 
• 
beauty, romance, sensitivity, femininity 
• 
milk, grains, liquids 
• 
growth (health in childhood), fertility 
• 
cooks, nurses, caterers 
• 
eyesight 
• 
breasts, brain 
• 
pearls 
• 
the metal silver 
• 
northwestern direction 
• 
Monday 
• 
menstrual cycle 

<<<PAGE 36>>>
 
 
KUJA—MARS 
In Hindu astrology, Mars Is a first-class malefic capable of harming any or 
all of its associations. It destroys by way of aggression, violence. Impulsiveness, 
accidents, and insensitivity. It also, however, gives energy, drive, determination, 
and the ability to put one’s personal desires above those of others. If Mars is weak 
or afflicted in a horoscope, the person will lack ambition and motivation, while 
success remains elusive. 
Mars also rules courage and bravery and all military functions. Therefore, 
generals and commanders, as well as anyone who has the desire to rule or lead 
others, have a strong or significantly placed Mars. This is also the planet of 
passions and desires, and has much to do with sexual activity. Another function 
of Mars is that of mechanical or technical ability. As such it creates surgeons, 
engineers, mechanics, and those who excel in the use of their hands. 
The main difference regarding Mars between Hindu and Western astrology 
is that in the Hindu system Mars is the Indicator of brothers and sisters {except 
for the eldest) and landed property. That aside, the only point worth reiterating 
is that in this event-oriented system of astrology, a malefic such as Mars causes 
troubles, disputes, and miseries unless it is posited in one of the 4 upachaya, or 
growing, houses, (the 3rd, 6th, 10th, or 11th), where malefics produce good 
effects. 
Mars is masculine, dry. and fiery. It is best placed in the 10th house, 
where it receives dtk bala, or directional strength. It operates best in Capricorn, 
its exalted sign, and worst in Cancer, its fallen placement. It also functions well 
in Arles and Scorpio, the signs it rules. The gem to wear to strengthen a weak or 
afflicted Mars is red coral. The friends who welcome Mars in their houses are the 
Sun, Moon, and Jupiter. Mercury is its enemy, while Venus and Saturn are 
neutral in friendship. The scriptures relate that Mars represents the 5 senses. 
Another common name for Mars is Mangat 
INDICATIONS OF MARS 
• brothers and sisters (except the eldest) 
• courage, bravery, heroic deeds 
• sports 
• property

<<<PAGE 37>>>
 
 
• 
mechanical or technical ability 
• 
builders, designers, engineers, surgeons, mechanics 
• 
the military, soldiers, policemen, war 
• 
generals, commanders, rulers 
• 
accidents, violence, fires 
• 
cuts, bums, bruises 
• 
ambition, motivation, desires 
• 
physical strength, forcefulness 
• 
temper, arguments, fights 
• 
weapons, guns, explosives 
• 
energy, aggressiveness 
• 
passions, sex 
• 
medical operations 
• 
the blood, muscular system, bone marrow 
• 
Tuesday 
• 
southern direction 
• 
red coral 

<<<PAGE 38>>>
 
 
BUDDHA— MERCURY 
 
 
Mercuiy is the planet of intellectual and communicative matters. By itself, 
it is a purely benefic influence which energizes its associations and produces 
positive results. However, because it is a neutral, sexless, and adaptable planet, 
it takes on the nature and quality of any planet it is conjunct with or aspected 
by. Therefore it is crucial to thoroughly analyze its condition before interpreting 
its effects in a house. It must also be understood though, that if Mercuiy being 
conjunct with a malefic such as Mars, is thus spoiled and itself becomes malefic, 
then Mars will have received a very beneficial energy and become powerfully 
enhanced. The house, however, must be delineated as being occupied by 2 
malefics. 
Mercuiy governs intelligence, speech, education, and all mental pursuits. 
It is responsible for creating writers, lecturers, and teachers. It also rules trade 
and commerce and will be prominent in the lives of business people. Other 
matters dependent upon the condition of Mercury are the nervous system and 
confidence. Therefore, when badly placed or afflicted, Mercury indicates a person 
who is nervous, overly excitable, conceited, and insecure. 
Another point worth mentioning is that Mercury may. without malicious 
intent, cause harm in certain houses due to its superficial nature. It has been 
labeled by the Hindu sages as being fickle, two-faced, and often conducive to 
detachment and an overly Independent nature. 
There is little difference in the treatment of this planet between Hindu and 
Western astrology except that the Hindus consider Mercury to be exalted in the 
first 15 degrees of Virgo rather than the sign Aquarius. It is also important to 
note that Mercury is not the only planet to govern the mind, since this 
assignment is shared with the Moon, which rules memory and the common-
sense aspect of the intellect. 
Mercury is sexless, neutral, cold, and moist. It is best placed in the 1st 
house where it receives dik bala, or directional strength. It functions best in the 
first half of Virgo, where it is exalted, and worst in Pisces, its fallen sign. It owns 
Gemini and Virgo and produces very good results in either sign. Mercury is a 
very youthful planet and gives such an appearance when it associates with a 
planet or house connected in some way to the physical body (i.e„ the 1st house 
or its ruler). The gem to wear to strengthen an afflicted Mercury is green emerald. 
The friends of Mercury

<<<PAGE 39>>>
 
 
are the Sun and Venus, in whose signs Mercury is welcomed. The Moon is an 
enemy to Mercury, while Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are neutral to it. 
INDICATIONS OF MERCURY 
• 
intelligence 
• 
education, learning, teaching 
• 
speech, poetry 
• 
confidence 
• 
communication 
• 
writing, drawing 
• 
books, papers, publishing 
• 
conscious mind, intellect, analytical ability 
• 
commerce, trade, business 
• 
humor, wit 
• 
astrology, math 
• 
nervous system, lungs, intestines 
• 
nerve disorders, brain diseases, epilepsy 
• 
short journeys 
• 
writers, astrologers, secretaries, scholars, etc. 
• 
northern direction 
• 
Wednesday 
• 
green emerald 

<<<PAGE 40>>>
 
 

<<<PAGE 41>>>
 
 
GURU— JUPITER 
 
 
Jupiter is the planet of luck and fortune. It is an expansive, optimistic 
energy which brings benefits to whatever planets or houses it associates with. It 
rules opportunity, prosperity, affluence, and money. It also tells much about a 
person’s deserved benefits earned from activities of previous lives. This is 
because Hindu life is based on the theory of karma and reincarnation. This 
means that what appears in one's life as luck or chance advantages are 
considered the results of past efforts. So the condition of Jupiter (as well as the 
5 th house) may be analyzed to derive information about one's past life credit. 
Another main attribute of Jupiter is its rulership of religion, philosophy, 
and spiritual affairs. Its influence is more inclined towards appreciation of 
traditional beliefs, faith, and devotion rather than ascetic, occult or mystical 
tendencies. But it should be noted that in this system, which does not include 
the planets Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. Jupiter and Saturn are considered the 
outer planets, capable of bestowing the higher evolutionary qualities of man. In 
this vein it is interesting to note that when Jupiter and Saturn form any mutual 
aspect (either the conjunction or opposition) a great spiritual nature is the result. 
There is no difference in the treatment of this great beneflc between Hindu 
and Western astrology except that Jupiter in the Hindu system is the chief 
planetary Indicator of children. Therefore if Jupiter is exalted or very powerful, 
the person should enjoy a good relationship with his children, and their lives will 
be generally fortunate. If the planet is afflicted, the opposite is the case, or there 
may be very few or no children at all. Of course the 5th house must also be 
considered. 
Jupiter is satvic (pure), beneflc, and masculine. It functions best in 
Cancer, its exaltation sign, and worst in Capricorn, where it is fallen. Jupiter 
rules Sagittarius and Pisces and gives very good effects in either of those signs. 
Its best house placement is the 1st, where it receives dik bala, or directional 
strength. The friends of Jupiter are the Sun, Moon, and Mars. Mercury and 
Venus are its enemies, and Saturn is neutral. One may wear yellow topaz or 
yellow sapphire to strengthen a weak or afflicted Jupiter. Another common name 
for this planet is BrihaspatL

<<<PAGE 42>>>
 
 
INDICATIONS OF JUPITER 
• 
money, wealth, prosperity 
• 
luck, fortune, opportunity 
• 
religion, philosophy 
• 
children 
• 
long distance travel 
• 
faith, devotion, spirituality 
• 
wisdom, truthfulness, morality 
• 
charity, benevolence, compassion 
• 
foreigners, foreign affairs 
• 
meditation 
• 
astrology 
• 
law, legal affairs 
• 
liver, allergies, thighs 
• 
optimism 
• 
speculation, gambling 
• 
solutions to problems 
\ 
• 
one's guru or religious teachers 
• 
past life credit 
• 
Thursday 
• 
northeastern direction 
/ 
• 
yellow sapphire, yellow topaz 
• 
bankers, lawyers, judges, ministers, gurus, religious leaders 

<<<PAGE 43>>>
 
 
SUKRA—VENUS 
 
 
Venus is the planet of love. It is a benefic and enhances the house it 
occupies, as well as any planet it aspects or associates with. Like Jupiter it 
bestows money, comforts, and fortune on a person when it is strong and 
significantly placed. Apart from the fact that it governs such crucial matters as 
love affairs and married life, it also specifically rules happiness. Therefore, almost 
no other astrological condition can spoil the sweetness of life like an afflicted 
Venus. It is also a planet of beauty, sensuality, and passion, and anyone with a 
well-placed Venus is likely to be sensitive, beautiful, magnetic, and attractive to 
the opposite sex. The person would also be artistic or appreciative of beauty, 
since Venus is the planet of aesthetic appreciation. 
Venus also rules the reproductive system, and when ill-placed or afflicted 
by maleflcs it often causes venereal diseases, sexual disorders, or reproductive 
ailments. It is also noted that when Venus is in Virgo, its fallen sign, an 
overindulgence in sex or sensual pleasures often results. 
There is almost no major difference in the consideration of Venus between 
East and West except that the Hindus use Venus to delineate the extent of one’s 
comforts, luxuries, conveyances, and happiness. However, the great importance 
of this planet lies in its rulership of love affairs, the spouse, and marriage. It may 
also be mentioned that when Venus is in an angular house (1st, 4th, 7th, or 
10th), it produces a person who is extremely kind and forgiving. 
Venus is feminine and watery and is best placed in the 4th house, where 
it receives dtk bala, or directional strength. It also operates best in Pisces, its 
exaltation sign, and worst in Virgo, where it is fallen. It owns Taurus and Libra 
and of course gives very good results in those signs. The gem to strengthen an 
afflicted Venus is a diamond. The metal silver is also of benefit to a weak Venus. 
The friends of Venus are Mercury and Saturn. Its enemies are the Sun and Moon, 
and it is not welcomed in their signs. Mars and Jupiter are neutral to Venus. 
INDICATIONS OF VENUS 
• marriage, love matters, romance 
• comforts, luxuries, jewelry 
• wealth, prosperity 
• 
happiness 
• 
beauty 
• 
vehicles, conveyances 

<<<PAGE 44>>>
 
 
• 
sensuality, passion, sexual pleasure 
• 
art. dance, music, drama 
• 
actors, artists, musicians, etc. 
• 
reproductive system, semen 
• 
venereal diseases, ailments of ovaries or uterus 
• 
mantras, medicine 
• 
hypnotism, mesmerism, casting of spells 
• 
southeastern direction 
• 
Friday 
• 
the metal silver 
• 
diamonds 

<<<PAGE 45>>>
 
 
SANI — SATURN 
 
 
In the event-oriented Hindu astrology, Saturn is generally the most 
dreaded of all the planets. It is the epitome of malevolence and harms the house 
it occupies and any houses it aspects. It also spoils any planets it conjoins or 
aspects. Saturn’s associations are destroyed in a rather "karmic," or fateful, way, 
meaning that there is little a person can do about whatever signification has been 
ruined. In short, this planet victimizes a person unless it is placed in a house 
that can utilize a malefic, and even then there is likely to be some evidence of 
injury. 
Although Saturn’s very nature is to restrict, deny, and destroy, it also, as 
one of the two outer planets in Hindu astrology, is capable of bestowing the 
greatest evolutionary qualities a person may possess, A well-aspected and well-
placed Saturn indicates a person of wisdom, integrity. and discipline. It is 
especially helpful to those persons on the spiritual path who are diligently 
seeking perfection, for Saturn gives humility, patience, dedication, and the most 
genuine sense of non-attachment to worldly desires and pleasures. It is a 
spiritual influence par excellence. It is noted that nearly all those involved in 
serious new-age practices, religions, and philosophies have Saturn aspecting the 
Sun. ascendant, or ascendant ruler. 
Another fine attribute of Saturn is its power to give leadership ability. In 
the ancient Hindu scriptures, this is the planet most cited as making a person 
"leader of his village”. This may be related to the fact that the wisdom indicated 
by Saturn has been gained by experience rather than by philosophy or 
intelligence, as is the case with Jupiter, the other spiritual planet. In any case, 
Saturn is the planet of authority, and it bestows the ability to govern and lead 
others. 
Apart from the fact that Saturn’s effects in the Hindu system are 
considered more blatantly malefic, there is little difference in the meaning of the 
planet from Western astrology. There is, however, one major signification which 
should be noted, and that is the matter of longevity, whose rulership is assigned 
to Saturn. A powerful and well-aspected Saturn indicates a long life, although 
this must be balanced with an analysis of the 8th house, which also rules the 
same. In Hindu writings the term ayush karaka is used to denote the Indicator 
of longevity, and it Is understood that the reference is to Saturn.

<<<PAGE 46>>>

<<<PAGE 47>>>
 
 
Saturn Is cold, dry, earthy, and masculine. It is known to be tamastc, or 
lethargic and destructive. It is an old or elderly planet, and when significantly 
placed so as to aspect or associate with the ascendant or ascendant ruler, it will 
give an aged appearance early in life. Saturn receives dlk bala, or directional 
strength, in the 7th house, where it becomes quite powerful and its significations 
are strengthened. However, it should be noted that for some reason this is the 
one case where a planet in its dlk bala position causes great destruction to the 
house it occupies. Regarding sign placements, Saturn functions best in Libra, 
where it is exalted, and worst in Aries, its fallen sign. It rules Capricorn and 
Aquarius, where it also gives very good results. The friends of Saturn who 
welcome its presence in their houses are Mercury and Venus. The Sun, Moon, 
and Mars are its enemies, while Jupiter is neutral. It should be mentioned, 
though, that it is commonly stated in the scriptural writings that this planet gives 
excellent results in Sagittarius and Pisces (the signs ruled by Jupiter). This is so 
even though in the technical friendship scheme Jupiter is simply a neutral to 
Saturn. The gem a person may wear to strengthen an afflicted Saturn is a blue 
sapphire. 
INDICATIONS OF SATURN 
• longevity, death 
• misery, adversity, sorrows 
• restriction, denial, delays 
• discipline, responsibility 
• accidents, chronic diseases 
• authority figures, elders 
• leadership, ambition, wisdom bom of experience 
• humility, honesty, sincerity 
• spirituality, non-attachment, asceticism 
• perfection, highest human qualities 
• organization, form, structure 
• thieves, theft 
• paralysis, asthma, rheumatism 
• teeth, bones 
• construction work, carpentry, tedious work, mining, bricklaying 
•wood, coal, steel, iron 
• real estate dealers 
• ascetics, monks, hermits 
• Saturday 
• blue sapphire, blue and black gemstones 
• Lord Shiva, Shalvites (disciples of Lord Shiva)

<<<PAGE 48>>>
 
 
RAHU & KETU—THE NORTH AND SOUTH NODES 
Rahu and Ketu are two malefic influences which are not in fact planets but 
calculated points in the sky. Because they generate recognizable effects in a horoscope, 
they have been labled “shadowy planets" by the ancient Hindu sages. The best way to 
understand Rahu and Ketu is to consider the Hindu mythological story about their 
existence. It seems that Lord Vishnu was distributing amrita. a potion granting 
immortality, to the Devas (Gods) and planetary beings. After the nectar was finished, the 
Sun and Moon discovered that a rakshasa, or demon, had managed to enter the room 
and gulp down the potion. After the serpentlike demon was exposed by the luminaries, 
Lord Vishnu grabbed his sword and severed the demon in two. However, having already 
gained immortality, this being did not die but instead became two creatures. The top half 
of the rakshasa was named Rahu, and the bottom portion, Ketu. And ever since that time 
the nodes have been bitter enemies of the luminaries. It is said that for this reason the 
nodes regularly attempt to swallow up the Sun and Moon (this occurs during every 
eclipse, when either luminary is conjunct with Rahu or Ketu). However, the luminaries 
of course always escape, as they also are Immortal. 
To truly understand the effects of the nodes, one should always keep in mind the 
above story, for Rahu and Ketu indeed behave like two parts of a demon. Such a being 
may be thought of as an animalistic or instinctual creature with no directed intelligence, 
bent on achieving all the pleasurable stimulation it can possibly grasp. This is an 
especially good image for Rahu, whose absolute essence is that of insatiable worldly 
desire. A purely hedonistic, unconscious, and insensitive being is this character. And if 
Rahu can be described as such, what can possibly be said of Ketu. the portion of the 
serpent without a brain! With no special effort, Ketu can produce some of the most 
Intense, compulsive, and unconscious behavior. 
However, the kinds of effects Rahu and Ketu may cause depend even more than 
with other planets, on the other astrological specifics involved. For although Rahu and 
Ketu are considered planets in Hindu astrology and give relatively predictable results, 
they behave differently than the other heavenly bodies. Because they are elemental and 
Instinctual forces, they are more like masses of energy than directed forces. Nor do they 
have the ability to cast aspects as other planets do. And although Rahu and Ketu are 
certainly malefics, it is often harder to know the exact injury they indicate in a horoscope. 
Suffice it to say that the nodes are generally better placed in houses which can utilize 
malefic planets (the 3rd, 6th, 10th, & 11th), and that more havoc is created if Rahu or 
Ketu occupy the houses of enemies, or if they are aspected by malefics. 
Regarding the significations of the nodes, there is little discernable difference in 
what is listed in the ancient scriptures between the two. Both are responsible for all sorts 
of evils, such as Incurable diseases, murder, theft, poison, snakes, fears, phobias, 

<<<PAGE 49>>>
 
 
undiagnosable illnesses, imprisonment, and on and on and on! But certain intelligent 
distinctions are made, especially concerning the more positive attributes. For instance, 
it is only natural that if Rahu indicates, worldly desires, it is capable of giving power, 
fame, political success, money and beauty when beneficially placed. However, it should 
not be forgotten that the desires of Rahu are insatiable, and therefore satisfaction may 
not necessarily result from the attainment of these benefits. It may also be mentioned 
that the scriptures declare that whatever is given in the 18-year Rahu dasa (period) is 
usually taken away in the last few years before that period ends. 
As for the traits of Ketu, this planet is called moksha karaka, or indicator of 
enlightenment. And indeed it does give very fine spiritual tendencies, especially qualities 
of asceticism and non-attachment. It is therefore rather common to find a prominently 
positioned Ketu in the horoscope of a dedicated spiritual seeker. Also, in a similar vein, 
Ketu is known as Gnana karaka. Gnana is a term meaning knowledge, wisdom, or 
discrimination, which in India is taken to be a specific path to enlightenment. Therefore, 
along with the spiritual tendencies created, this planet confers great discriminative 
powers, even to the extent of psychic ability. 
Although the sages assert that Rahu's effects are similar to Saturn’s and Ketu’s 
like that of Mars, this is true only in a general sense. For Ketu, when inauspiciously 
placed, can ruin significations in an uncommonly awful and devious way. Whereas Rahu 
disturbs by way of lethargy, grossness and insensitivity, it does so in a manner that is 
much less intense and purposeful. 
The most detrimental effects of the nodes occur when either one is closely 
conjunct with another planet. In such cases, the conjoined planet is terribly spoiled, as 
are the houses it rules. If Rahu is the node involved, it harms mainly by dulling or 
suppressing the energy of the other influence so that it is powerless to function in its 
normal way. On the other hand, a planet conjunct with Ketu seems to be dissolved or 
swallowed up into an abyss or kind of black hole. Then, rather than simply having its 
potency clipped, that planet behaves in a weird, compulsive, and unconscious or 
uncontrollable way. 
When delineating the nodes, it cannot be overemphasized that one should bear in 
mind the lack and abandonment of logic, reasoning ability, and Intelligence that 
characterize Rahu and Ketu They are animalistic, obsessive, and compulsive influences 
and indicate areas of life where a person simply has very little control. 
Rahu and Ketu are not characterized as masculine or feminine. And there 
is almost no agreement by the Hindu sages about their beneficial or detrimental 
sign placements. The only certainty is that the nodes are both exalted in either 
of Mercury’s signs, Gemini and Virgo. This is logical because Rahu and Ketu, 
which are devoid of any mental qualities, must benefit by the intelligence and 
stimulation of the Mercury energy. It should also be mentioned that Rahu and 
Ketu normally move backwards but occasionally stop and travel forward for brief 
periods. It is noted that the nodes become extremely powerful during these times. 
Therefore, whenever analyzing a horoscope, the ephemeris should be consulted 

<<<PAGE 50>>>
 
 
to determine whether these planets were stationary direct or traveling in forward 
motion. If so, then they may be considered highly positive and energizing forces 
giving similar results to that of their exaltation positions. Since no fallen 
placements are given for Rahu and Ketu it may be remembered that the nodes 
are great enemies of the Sun and Moon and may give worse than usual results 
in their signs. Although Ketu is not included in the friendship scheme, most 
astrologers take the enemies of Rahu to also be inimical to Ketu Also, any aspects 
malefic to the nodes will act as afflictions and cause them to produce even more 
disturbance than normal. The gem to strengthen a weak or afflicted Rahu is 
Gomed or hesson- ite, while Ketu governs Cat’s eye or chrysoberyl. 
INDICATIONS OF RAHU 
• insatiable worldly desires, great worldly benefits 
• inertia, dullness, laziness 
• sense gratification 
• ignorance 
• gomed or hessonite (honey colored form of agate) 
INDICATIONS OF KETU 
• asceticism, non-attachment to worldly desires 
• amrita, natural healing methods, healing diets, etc. 
• moksha (enlightenment, final liberation) 
• psychic ability 
• gnana (wisdom, knowledge, discrimination) 
• tendency to go unnoticed or be invisible to others 
• ghosts, spirits, astral forces 
• cat's eye or chrysoberyl (not to be confused with tiger eye) 
INDICATIONS OF BOTH RAHU AND KETU 
• 
occultism & spirituality 
• 
compulsive & unconscious behavior 
• 
fears, phobias, nightmares 
• 
mental derangement 
• 
associations with low-class people 
• 
addictions, bad habits 
• 
poisons 
• 
illusion, deception 
• 
dirt, filth, parasites 
• 
stuttering, spasms 
• 
undiagnosable and incurable ailments. 
• 
theft, murder, imprisonment 
• 
witchcraft, magic 
• 
ulcers, cancer, skin diseases 

<<<PAGE 51>>>
 
 

<<<PAGE 52>>>
 
 
BHAVAS—THE HOROSCOPE HOUSES 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHY DIVIDES LIFE INTO 4 CATEGORIES: 
1. DHARMA— life purpose or righteous action 
2. ARTHA—wealth matters 
3. KAMA—desires 
4. MOKSHA—enlightenment, self-realization, final liberation 
• 
Houses 1, 5, & 9 correspond to fire signs and are therefore dharma 
houses. 
• 
Houses 2, 6, & 10 correspond to earth signs and are therefore artha 
houses. 
• 
Houses 3,7, & 11 correspond to air signs and are therfore kama houses. 
•Houses 4, 8, & 12 correspond to water signs and are therefore moksha 
houses. 
FIRST HOUSE IS A DHARMA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO LIFE PURPOSE. 
• 
the personal self, ego 
• 
appearance, face, head 
• 
character, disposition, tendencies, conduct 
• 
well-being, happiness 
• 
health, longevity 
• 
strength, will power 
• 
dignity, self-esteem, self-love, confidence 
• 
fame, ability to be recognized, general prosperity 
• 
birth, early childhood, start in life 
SECOND HOUSE IS AN ARTHA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO WEALTH MATTERS. 
• 
money, wealth, finances 
• 
knowledge, education, educators 
• 
speech, use of foul language, speech defects 
• 
orators, poets 
• 
imagination 
• 
truthfulness, tendency to lie 
• 
family life, domestic happiness 
• 
face, mouth, tongue 
• 
vision in right eye, neck, throat 
• 
confidence, timidity

<<<PAGE 53>>>
 
 
• 
food one eats 
•charity 
• 
dress 
THIRD HOUSE IS A KAMA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO DESIRES. 
• 
one’s own efforts and adventures 
• 
younger brothers and sisters 
• 
all desires 
• 
life, energy, excitement, enthusiasm 
• 
initiative, motivation 
• 
courage, bravery , fear 
• 
voice, singing 
• 
fine arts, music, dance, drama 
• 
musicians, actors, dancers, singers 
• 
theatrical directors and producers 
• 
managers, organizers, detail work 
• 
hearing, the right ear 
• 
the hands, arms, shoulders 
• 
letters, writings, journals, all communications 
• 
firmness of personality (mental stability—but not the mind) 
• 
Travel—short journeys 
i 
FOURTH HOUSE IS A MOKSHA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO FINAL LIBERATION. 
• 
mother 
• 
happiness and contentment 
• 
the heart, emotions and passions 
• 
fixed assets, land, buildings, real estate 
• 
comforts, luxuries 
• 
cars, boats, planes, conveyances 
• 
academic degree, education (to an extent) 
• 
endings, the close of life 
• 
farms, graves 
FIFTH HOUSE IS A DHARMA HOUSE CONNECTED TO LIFE PURPOSE. 
• 
children 
• 
the mind, intelligence 
  
• 
poorvapunya (rewards or credit due from last incarnation) 
• 
sense of destiny 
• 
speculation, gambling, investments 
• 
love affairs, romance, love from spouse 
• 
kingship, government, rulers, politicians 

<<<PAGE 54>>>
 
 
• 
spiritual techniques, mantras, religious practices or rituals 
• 
morals, good deeds, charity 
• 
merit, fine qualities, Integrity, humility, ability 
• 
religious-mindedness 
• 
pleasures, fun, sports 
• 
art of painting or drawing 
SIXTH HOUSE IS  AN ARTHA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO WEALTH MATTERS. 
• 
health, illness, disease 
• 
enemies, competitors (seen and unseen), foes, jealous people 
• 
daily job, service 
• 
detail Jobs, service Jobs 
• 
preparation of food, restaurants, caterers 
• 
appetite 
• 
subordinates, tenants, maids, employees 
• 
maternal unde 
• 
medical profession, nursing, doctors 
• 
cousins 
• 
litigations, tendency to be charged in court cases 
SEVENTH HOUSE IS A KAMA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO DESIRES. 
• 
the spouse, married life 
• 
all partners 
• 
sexual passions 
• 
residence in foreign countries 
•courts 
• 
veins and loins 
EIGHTH HOUSE IS A MOKSHA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO FINAL LIBERATION. 
• 
life, longevity 
• 
means of death, experience of death 
• 
wills & legacies, insurance benefits 
•joint finances, partner’s money, alimony 
• 
ability to receive partner’s wealth 
• 
sexual strength, reproductive system, venereal diseases 
• 
sexual attractiveness 
• 
chronic and long-term illnesses of any kind 
• 
occult subjects, secretive matters 
• 
intuition 
• 
accidents 
NINTH HOUSE IS A DHARMA HOUSE CONNECTED TO LIFE PURPOSE. 
• 
the father 
• 
luck, fortune, solutions to problems 
• 
religion, philosophy 
• 
faith, worship 
• 
a person’s Guru 
• 
spiritual teachers, elders 

<<<PAGE 55>>>
 
 
• 
travel—longjoumeys 
• 
wisdom 
• 
higher knowledge of all kinds, higher education 
♦law 
• 
performance of good deeds, charity, virtue 
TENTH HOUSE IS AN ARTHA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO WEALTH MATTERS. 
• 
career, professional activities 
• 
the dharma, or life purpose 
• 
fame, honor, status 
• 
worldly power 
• 
holy pilgrimages 
• 
good deeds, activities which benefit society 
• 
authority figures, eminent persons, government officials 
ELEVENTH HOUSE IS A KAMA HOUSE, CONNECTED TO DESIRES. 
• 
major goals, ambitions, and desires 
• 
opportunities 
• 
eldest sibling 
• 
gains and profits by any means (wealth) 
• 
sudden financial fluctuations 
• 
supplemental monies- wealth from sideline jobs or sudden ventures 
• 
paternal uncle 
• 
legs and ankles 
TWELFTH HOUSE IS A MOKSHA HOUSE CONNECTED TO FINAL LIBERATION. 
• 
expenditure, expenses 
• 
moksha, self-realization, enlightenment, final liberation, salvation 
• 
the state after death (heaven or hell), lokas, or planes of existence 
• 
the bedroom, bedding 
• 
pleasures of the bed (sexual pleasure) 
• 
"unknown places” (remote, far-off countries) 
• 
travel to foreign lands, life In remote countries 
• 
hospitals, prisons 
• 
confinement 
• 
hearing, the left ear 
• 
vision, the left eye 
• 
feet 
•anus 
• 
waste, debts, misfortune 
• 
experience with thieves and robbers 
• 
secret enemies 

<<<PAGE 56>>>
 
 
RASIS—THE ZODIAC SIGNS 
Although the signs of the zodiac In Hindu astrology are of the same 
characteristics as in the Western system (except that Capricorn is represented as 
a crocodile Instead of a goat), there is very little information extracted from their 
use. Certain modern Hindu astrological authors have used sign delineations in 
their texts, however, it appears that they have taken their knowledge from 
Western astrological wisdom. In Hindu scriptures signs are simply not employed 
In this way. And in practice, nor do Hindu astrologers bother with sign 
interpretations. 
Rasis, or signs, are not totally disregarded, but they are used in a very 
basic and simplistic way. For example, it may be said that a person bom with a 
Gemini ascendant will be intellectually oriented, since Mercury rules his 
ascending sign. Or an astrologer may note that Venus posited in a sign of Mars 
(i.e., Scorpio) will give a person strong sexual passions. But the Western sort of 
explanation of Venus in Scorpio, describingjealousy, intensity, selfishness, etc., 
is out of bounds in this system. There are only simplistic statements made, based 
upon the mixture of the posited planet and the lord of the particular sign. It may 
be that there is in fact value to sign delineations in Hindu astrology—that for 
example, more leaders are bom with Leo ascendants, or more spiritualists have 
Aquarian or Pisces midheavens. But It should be understood by Western 
astrologers that this kind of delineation is not Hindu astrology as handed down 
by the ancient sages or as practiced In India at the present time. 
A common use of signs occurs in the Hindu yogas, or planetary unions, 
where a statement may be made noting that, for example, if a particular planet 
involved in a yoga combination is found occupying, say, a cardinal sign, then a 
specifically defined effect will result. This is a matter of applying memorized 
factual rules rather than any kind of thoughtful interpretation or analysis. 
Since there is no great body of information which has been imparted 
regarding the effects of signs, what is given below are simply the Hindu names of 
each sign, as well as their essential characteristics. These attributes are known 
as elements and triplicitles, and as they are used only in scriptural delineations 
in a technical manner, no explanation of their meaning is necessary. When 
studying the scriptures, these must be learned.

<<<PAGE 57>>>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
42 
SIGNS 
HINDU NAME 
Aries 
Mesha 
Cardinal 
Fire 
masculine 
Taurus 
Vrtshabh 
Fixed 
Earth 
feminine 
Gemini 
Mithuna 
Dual 
Air 
masculine 
Cancer 
Kataka 
Cardinal 
Water 
feminine 
Leo 
Stmha 
Fixed 
Fire 
masculine 
Virgo 
Kanya 
Dual 
Earth 
feminine 
Libra 
Thula 
Cardinal 
Air 
masculine 
Scorpio 
Vrtschtk 
Fixed 
Water 
feminine 
Sagittarius 
Dhanus 
Dual 
Fire 
masculine 
Capricorn 
Makara 
Cardinal 
Earth 
feminine 
Aquarius 
Kumbha 
Fixed 
Air 
masculine 
Pisces 
Meena 
Dual 
Water 
feminine 

<<<PAGE 58>>>
 
 
GAINING PERSPECTIVE OF THE HINDU SYSTEM 
Hindu predictive astrology is very different from Western astrology. In 
order to learn this system, it is crucial to approach the work innocently and 
newly, disregarding as best as possible whatever is known from Western 
astrological wisdom. It is not the difference in specific techniques which is of 
significance. It is that the ESSENCE of delineation is radically dissimilar. The 
Hindu method is much more simple and circumscribed than Western astrology. 
Planets are either benefic or malefic by nature. Any planet conjunct with or 
aspected by a benefic flourishes. Planets aspected by malefics are destroyed. 
Houses are either weak or powerful, and power produces good effects while 
weakness destroys significations. Benefic planets cast beneficial aspects onto 
houses; malefic aspects destroy houses. The trinal houses (5th and 9th) give good 
results, while the dusthanas, or evil, houses (6th, 8th, and 12th) cause misery. 
Therefore, make no mistake about it: there is no meditative blending or symbolic 
imageiy to be used in this system. There are only rules to be followed and 
accounted for. Once having learned the basic significations, there is simply the 
process of considering the innumerable influences, some positive and some 
negative, and then drawing a final conclusion as to whether a signification is 
more likely to flourish, wither, or function somewhere in between. Astrologers 
who carry detailed sign analysis or symbolic imageiy into this work will fall flat 
when it comes to prediction. They will also have invented a brand new system of 
astrology! 
Because of the preconceptions Western astrologers may have, and simply 
In order to gain a more clear perspective and sense of proportion regarding Hindu 
techniques, the reader Is requested at this point to read 1 or 2 pages of the 
section titled "Horoscopes of Famous People." This should be done, however, in 
a very light and easy fashion, with no intention at all to understand the details 
involved, but merely to get a sense of how this ancient system of astrology works. 
Otherwise, when attempting to learn the various elements given in this book, 
there is likely to be a difficulty in knowing which factors take precedence over 
others and which deserve emphasis in terms of delineation. This could especially 
occur because the section titled “Planets in The Houses” forms the bulk of this 
text and therefore may seem to be the predominant factor involved. One might 
then be somewhat surprised when finally reaching the practical application 
section “Horoscopes of Famous People." Those astrologers familiar with horary 
astrology may find the work easier, since horary is also a system based upon 
many rules, regulations, and significations.

<<<PAGE 59>>>
 
 
However, anyone with a sincere desire to learn this system and with a moderate 
degree of patience will soon be making accurate predictions. And as always, 
experimentation and experience with the system are the best teachers, 

<<<PAGE 60>>>
 
 
 
FRIENDSHIPS BETWEEN PLANETS 
In Hindu astrology, planets have friends, enemies, and those which are 
considered neutral. Generally Rahu, Venus, Saturn, & Mercury are friendly to 
each other, while Jupiter, the Sun, the Moon, & Mars welcome each other’s 
presence. While Rahu Is Included in the friendship scheme, Ketu Is not. However, 
most astrologers consider Rahu’s enemies to also be inimical to Ketu. 
The friends, enemies, and neutrals of each planet have been given 
separately in the descriptions of each planet. However, below are 2 horoscope 
forms showing in which signs each planet is welcome or unwelcome. If a planet 
Is not posited in a particular sign In either chart, it is because that sign is a 
neutral Influence to the planet. Until the knowledge of planetary friendships is 
second nature, these graphs should be kept In sight when delineating any 
horoscope. 
Friendships are a basic and important part of delineation, as a planet in 
an enemy’s house cannot be expected to produce the same effects as it will in a 
sign where It is welcomed as a friend. Placement in a friendly or unfriendly sign 
will not affect a planet with the same Intensity as would an exaltation or fallen 
status, but the Influence Is not insignificant enough to be Ignored. Astrological 
work is essentially the consideration and blending of an innumerable number of 
factors, of which friendships are a basic technique to help tip the scales in either 
a positive or negative direction. 
What is discussed above is the issue of "permanent” or “natural"
