# source: _OceanofPDF.com_Elements_of_Vedic_Astrology_-_Dr_K_S_charak.pdf
# pages: 72-106
# compiled into: houses.json, planets.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 72>>>

...V...
Of Signs, Houses and Planets
Neither is this surely a woman, nor is this a
man, nor even is
this a eunuch. It is protected by the very bodies which it
acquires.
Shvetashvatara
Upanishad V/10
We have already seen that there are
twelve signs of the zodiac. One of
the signs happens to be the sign rising at
the eastern horizon at the time of
birth. This rising sign is called the lagna
or the ascendant. The lagna happens
to be the first house of the horoscope. By
this is meant that the houses and
signs do not coincide. The first house has
the label of the sign rising at the
time of birth, the second bears the label
of the sign that will rise next, and so
on.
The nine grahas (from the Sun to Ketu) or ‘planets’ are the
occupants of
these houses. The houses represent certain characteristics. The
signs falling
in these houses also represent certain characteristics, and the
two intermingle
to indicate something newer. Then the planets which occupy them
 inflict
further modifications.
In order to be able to make any fruitful predictions, it is
 essential to
understand the meanings of the signs, houses and planets. These
are briefly
indicated in the pages that follow.
A Horoscopic Chart
Before going further, it is important to appreciate how
 a horoscopic chart
looks like.

<<<PAGE 73>>>
A. North Indian Chart is the one in which the order of
the houses is fixed. It
consists of four central rhomboidal houses (which are
numbered 1, 4, 7 and
10, starting from the upper central rhomboid) and eight
triangular houses.
The sign rising at the time of birth is marked in the first
house or the upper
central rhomboid, and the remaining signs marked in regular
 order in an
anti-clockwise direction.
B. The South Indian Chart has the signs in a fixed
order in the chart. The
lagna is marked in the appropriate sign. The remaining
houses are counted in
a clock-wise manner.
C. An Eastern Indian Chart, often used in Bengal and
Orissa, also has the
signs in a fixed order in the chart. The ascendant is
 marked in the
appropriate sign. The remaining houses are counted in an
 anti-clockwise
direction.

<<<PAGE 74>>>
Whatever the type of horoscopic chart preferred, the planets
are placed in
the houses bearing the signs in which the planets are located
astronomically.
The process of working out the lagna and the position of
planets has been
dealt with in Chapters VIII and IX.
The Signs (or Rashis)
The signs of the zodiac have special features which are
being described here.

<<<PAGE 75>>>
1. Appearance and Habitat: The twelve signs of
the zodiac each have a
specific appearance and a habitat. This may be best
 described by
reproducing a dialogue between sage Pulastya and sage Narada, as
mentioned in the Vamana Purana.
Pulastaya addresses Narada, saying, “Sage Narada! Now I
 narrate to you
how these various signs look like, as also the areas they reside
in or haunt.
“The sign Mesha resembles a ram. It circulates
among the goats, the sheep
and regions holding wealth and precious stones. It
wanders on grassy lands,
and around lakes surrounded by vegetation.”
“The sign Vrisha resembles a bull. Cowhouses and
farmlands are its place
of residence.”
“A man and a woman bearing a trumpet and a harp
 represent the sign
Mithuna whose places of residence are the couch and
 the lounge. It
circulates amongst the singers, the dancers and the sculptors.
This dual sign
haunts the sports lovers and the pleasure houses.”
“Karkata has the appearance of a crab and lives
 in water. Its places of
residence include water-filled garden beds, river banks
 and un-inhabited
lands.”
“Simha (resembling a lion) resides in the
 mountains, forests, caves,
inaccessible places, deep ditches and the living
places of hunters.”
“Kanya (consists of a woman) standing in a boat
and holding corn and a
lamp in her hand, inhabits women’s pleasure rooms.”
“Narada! Tula is represented by a man holding a
balance in his hand, and its
residences include lanes, bazaars, towns, routes
and buildings.”
“Vrishchika resembles the scorpion in
appearance. It moves in crevices and
pits. Its areas of residence include
 poisons, animal excreta, stones and
insects.”
“Of Dhanu, the legs are like those of a horse.
It is radiant and holds a bow
and arrow. Well versed in horse riding, in
 handling of arms and in doing
daring and brave deeds, it resides in elephants,
chariots, etc.”
“O Brahmin! The mouth of Makara is like that of
 a deer, shoulders like
those of a bull and eyes like those of an elephant. It
moves in the rivers and

<<<PAGE 76>>>
resides in the ocean.”
“Kumbha resembles a man wearing wet clothes and
 holding on his
shoulders an empty pitcher. It moves in gambling houses and
 resides in
drinking dens.”
“The sign Meena consists of two fishes lying
side by side, the head of one
being beside the tail of the other. It circulates
in the places of pilgrimage and
in the oceans. It haunts pious places, temples
 of gods and houses of
Brahmins.”
2. Parts of the body: The various signs from
Mesha onwards represent (1)
head, (2) face, (3) shoulders, (4) chest, (5) heart
and stomach, (6) abdomen,
(7) lower abdomen and groin, (8) external genitalia,
(9) thighs, (10) knees,
(11) calves, and (12) feet.
3. Stature: Of short stature are signs Mesha,
Vrisha, Kumbha and Meena
(i.e., 1,2, 11 and 12).
Of tall stature are the signs Simha, Kanya, Tula and
Vrischika (i.e., 5, 6, 7
and 8).
Of even stature are the signs Mithuna, Karka, Dhanu and
Makara, (i.e., 3, 4,
9 and 10).
Note: Stature here has nothing to do with signs of long
ascension and those
of short ascension.
4. Diurnal strength: Strong during night are the
 signs Mesha, Vrisha,
Mithuna, Karka, Dhanu and Makara. Except Mithuna, they
rise by the hind
side (Prishtodaya). Strong during day are Simha, Kanya, Tula,
Vrischhika,
Kumbha and Meena. Except Meena, they rise by the head
(Sheershodaya).
Mithuna too rises by the head.
Meena rises both by the head and the tail (Ubhayodaya).
5. Malefic/Male: Odd signs, viz., 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
and 11.
6. Benefic/Female: Even signs, viz., 2, 4, 6, 8,
10 and 12.
7. Movable or otherwise:
Signs 1, 4, 7 and 10 are movable; they indicate change
and mobility.
Signs 2, 5, 8 and 11 are fixed; they indicate stability
and fixity.

<<<PAGE 77>>>
Signs 3, 6, 9 and 12 are mixed; they indicate a balance
between the fixed and
movable signs.
8. Directions:
East    :     signs 1, 5 and 9.
South :     signs 2, 6 and 10.
West  :     signs 3, 7 and 11.
North :     signs 4, 8 and 12.
9. Inherent nature:
Fiery   :     signs 1, 5 and 9.
Earthly     :     signs 2, 6 and 10.
Airy     :     signs 3, 7 and 11.
Watery    :     signs 4, 8 and 12.
10. Biological characters:
Quadrupeds: signs 1, 2, 5, posterior half of 9, and
anterior half of 10.
Bipeds: signs 3, 6, 7, 11, and anterior half of 9.
Insect (Keeta): signs 4 and 8.
Those inhabiting water: signs 12, and rosterior half of
(Jalachara) 10.
11. Constituent character:
Mineral (Dhatu):signs 1, 4, 7 and 10.
Vegetable (Moola):signs 2, 5, 8 and 11.
Animal (Jeeva): signs 3, 6, 9 and 12.
12. Caste:
Kshatriya: signs 1, 5 and 9.
Vaishya: signs 2, 6 and 10.
Shudra: signs 3, 7 and 11.
Brahmin: signs 4, 8 and 12.
13. Lords:

<<<PAGE 78>>>
Of the twelve signs, starting from Mesha, the lords are
respectively Mars,
Venus, Mercury, the Moon, the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn,
Saturn and Jupiter.
The Houses
The twelve houses of a horoscope deal with all conceivable
aspects of
life. The most important of all houses is the lagna or the first
house. The
remaining houses are basically related to the first house only. The
planets in
the horoscopic chart are subservient to the lagna, and their
original nature
undergoes modifications depending upon the lagna.
1. The Kendras (or Quadrants): Houses 1, 4, 7
and 10. These are highly
significant houses.
2. The Panapharas (or Successant Houses): Houses
2, 5, 8 and 11.
3. The Apoklimas (or Cadent Houses): Houses 3,
6, 9 and 12.
4. The Trikonas (or Trines): Houses 1, 5 and 9.
These are highly auspicious
and, along with the Kendras, determine the health,
wealth, status, dignity,
rise and virtue of a native. The lagna, being both a
kendra and a trikona, is
the most significant of all houses.
5. The Upachayas: Houses 3, 6, 10 and 11. These
houses indicate struggle,
competition and material achievement.
6. The Trika Houses: Houses 6, 8 and 12. These
are considered bad houses
(Duhsthanas). They indicate debt, disease, loss and
misery.
7. The Ayu-sthanas (or houses of longevity):
Houses 8 and 3 (8th from the
8th). They indicate the length of life and,
therefore, also the death.
8. The Maraka-sthanas (or killer houses): Houses
2 and 7.
9. The two halves of a horoscope:
(a) Houses 1 to 7 indicate the
invisible half and houses 7 to 1 indicate the
visible half of the horoscope.
(b) Houses 10 to 4 indicate
the eastern half and houses 4 to 10 indicate
the western half of the horoscope.
The significations of the twelve houses have been
listed elsewhere.

<<<PAGE 79>>>
The Planets
Nine main planets are employed in Vedic astrology. Their
 English
equivalents and symbols are given in Table V-1.
Table - V-1
Vedic Name : English equivalent
Ravi (Surya) : Sun
Chandra : Moon
Mangala : Mars
Budha : Mercury
Guru (Brihaspati) : Jupiter
Shukra : Venus
Shani : Saturn
Rahu : Rahu (Dragon’s head)
Ketu : Ketu (Dragon’s tail)
1. Physical Attributes
The Sun has a square build, scanty but curly hair, lovely
 appearance,
good intelligence, impressive voice, medium stature, red eyes, dark
 red
complexion, strong bones, bilious nature, firm temperament and saffron
robes.
The Moon has a slim but roundish body, beautiful appearance,
 lovely
eyes, sweet tongue, phlegm and wind in his composition, white
complexion,
short curly hair, amiable nature, Sattvika inclination,
discriminating wisdom,
restless nature, excessive sexual urge, white robes.
Mars is characterised by fierce red eyes, short stature,
tough and youthful
body, fickle but generous disposition, short but shining and
 curly hair,
valorous nature, Tamasika inclination, eagerness to hurt, easy
 excitability,
bilious disposition and fair complexion.
Mercury has a slim and beautiful body, large reddish eyes,
dark green
complexion, healthy skin, medium height, clear and witty speech,
expression
with multiple meanings, Rajasika inclination, plenty of energy,
 bile, wind
and phlegm in his composition, and green robes.

<<<PAGE 80>>>
Jupiter has a big belly and a fat body, pale eyes, virtuous
 disposition,
phlegmatic temperament, knowledge of scriptures and sciences,
 bright
yellow complexion, Sattvika inclination, sharp intelligence, keenness in
religious pursuits, forgiving nature and yellow-coloured dress.
Venus is dark brown and handsome, of symmetrical limbs and
dark curly
hair, writer of poetry, and has an amorous disposition. He has long
 arms,
broad chest, excessive seminal fluid, windy and phlegmatic temperament,
Rajasika inclination, grace, vigour, wisdom and intelligence, and
 multi-
coloured robes.
Saturn has a tall, lean and weak body, dark complexion,
stiff hair and
limbs, large teeth, lazy disposition, windy temperament, cruel
 nature,
Tamasika inclination, lame, dark and shabby robes.
Rahu and Ketu have a bluish complexion resembling smoke,
 wild in
bearing, intelligent, and of windy disposition.
2. Planetary Lordship
The Sun owns Simha
The Moon owns Karka
Mars owns Mesha and Vrischika
Mercury owns Mithuna and Kanya
Jupiter owns Dhanu and Meena
Venus owns Vrisha and Tula
Saturn owns Makara and Kumbha
3. Castes
Brahmins:     Jupiter, Venus
Kshatriyas:   Sun, Mars
Vaishyas:      Moon, Mercury
Shudra:   Saturn
4. Essential nature
Sattvika (good and noble): Sun, Moon, Jupiter
Rajasika (active and just): Mercury, Venus
Tamasika (dark and base): Mars, Saturn

<<<PAGE 81>>>
5. Rulership in respect of the Kaala-Purusha (or the
time personified)
Sun:  Soul
Moon:  Mind
Mars:  Essence
Mercury:  Speech
Jupiter:  Wisdom and comforts
Venus:  Seminal fluid
Saturn:  Miseries
6. Social status
King:  Sun, Moon
Commander-in-chief:  Mars
Heir-apparent:  Mercury
Ministers:  Jupiter, Venus
Servant:  Saturn
Army:  Rahu and Ketu
7. Gender
Masculine:  Sun, Mars, Jupiter
Feminine:  Moon, Venus
Eunuchs:  Mercury, Saturn
8. Rulership over body constituents
Sun:  Bones
Moon:  Blood
Mars:  Marrow
Mercury:  Skin
Jupiter:  Fat
Venus:  Seminal fluid
Saturn:  Nerves
9. Places represented
Sun:  Temple
Moon:  Watery place

<<<PAGE 82>>>
Mars:  Place of fire
Mercury:  Playground
Jupiter:  Treasure house
Venus:  Bedroom
Saturn:  Dirty places, sites of refuse disposal
10. Directions
Sun:  East
Moon:  North West
Mars:  South
Mercury:  North
Jupiter:  North East
Venus:  South East
Saturn:  West
Rahu:  South west
11. Directional strength
Mercury, Jupiter: East (Lagna or the 1st
house)
Sun, Mars: South (10th house)
Moon, Venus: North (4th house)
Saturn: West (7th house)
12. Benefics and Malefics
Natural benefics: Moon, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus
Natural malefics: Sun, Mars, Saturn, Rahu,
Ketu
The waning Moon and afflicted Mercury too
behave as malefics.
13. Exaltation, Debilitation and Moola Trikona
Planets are strong and favourable when placed in their
exaltation signs or
in Moola Trikona signs. Six signs or 180 degrees away from
its exaltation
point lies the debilitation point of a planet.

<<<PAGE 83>>>
14. Natural Mutual Relationship of Planets.
Planets according to their nature, are disposed as friends
or enemies or
neutrals towards other planets. The great Varahamihira sponsors
the view of
Satyacharya in determining the natural mutual relationship of
 planets.
According to this view, a planet’s friends are the lord of its
exaltation sign as
also the planets owning houses 2, 12, 5, 9, 4 and 8 from its
Moola Trikona
sign. Table V-3 shows the natural mutual relationship of planets
according to
the above view.

<<<PAGE 84>>>
15. Temporal relationship
Besides their natural disposition as friends, enemies or
equals (neutrals)
towards each other, planets become friends or enemies of each
 other
depending upon their location in a horoscopic chart.
Temporal friends: Planets located in houses 2, 12, 3, 11, 4
and 10 from
any planet become its temporal friends.
Temporal enemies: Planets located in houses 1 (i.e.,
 conjunction), 7
(opposition), 5, 9, 6 and 8 from any planet become its temporal
enemies.
16. Five grades of relationship
On the basis of their natural and temporal disposition
towards each other,
planets may have any of the five grades of relationships
given below:
17. Aspects, Combustion and Retrogression
Planets exert their influence on the houses and planets that
they aspect.
All planets fully aspect the seventh house, or planets located
therein, from
their own position. In addition, the outer planets (Mars, Jupiter
and Saturn)
have been granted special aspects. Thus Mars also fully aspects
houses 4 and
8, Jupiter houses 5 and 9, and Saturn houses 3 and 10. The
remaining planets
cast a quarter glance on houses 3 and 10, half an aspect on
houses 5 and 9,
and three-quarter aspect on houses 4 and 8.
Planets when close to the Sun tend to lose their strength
and vitality, and
are considered to be combust. A combust planet loses its
capacity to do good
and produces adverse results. Planets also become
retrograde when, during
their motion, they appear to be moving in a reverse
direction. The Sun and

<<<PAGE 85>>>
the Moon do not become retrograde while Rahu and Ketu
(almost) always
move in a retrograde direction. A retrograde planet produces
 unexpected
results and is generally adverse for health. A retrograde planet
also exerts
influence from its preceding house.

<<<PAGE 86>>>

...VI...
Nature of Planets
The man of knowledge
too acts in accordance with his own
nature. All beings follow their nature.
 What can obstinacy
accomplish?
Gita III/33
Analysis of a horoscopic chart
requires a thorough understanding of the
nature of planets. It is on the basis
of a proper knowledge of the nature of
planets that good and bad results can be
predicted with any accuracy. Before
venturing into predictive aspect of
astrology, it is imperative on the part of a
practitioner of astrology to spend
 some time mastering the principles that
govern the benevolence and malevolence
of planets.
Planets may be benefic or malefic by nature. Or they become
benefic or
malefic depending upon the nature of the rising sign in a horoscope.
Benefic
and malefic planets produce their results when their appropriate dashas
operate. Dashas thus help us in the timing of events.
The nature of various planets is determined on the basis of
 standard
astrological principles mentioned by the classical writers. These
principles
have been discussed in details in the Essentials of Medical
Astrology by the
author. The following account is primarily a reproduction
 of the same
principles.
Malefics and Benefics by nature
Planets may be malefic or benefic depending upon their
inherent nature.
Thus, Jupiter, Venus, waxing Moon and well-associated Mercury
are natural

<<<PAGE 87>>>
benefics. Similarly, the Sun, Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu, waning
 Moon
and afflicted Mercury are natural malefics. The Moon and Mercury are
naturally weak. The Moon though a mild and benevolent planet, behaves as
a
malefic when too close to the Sun. Mercury gets influenced too easily; it
thus
behaves as a benefic under benefic influence and as a malefic under
malefic
 influence. Rahu and Ketu too can behave as benefics especially
when placed in
the signs of Jupiter and Mercury.
Benefics and Malefics for different Lagnas
Parashara’s Principles
Planets behave as benefics and malefics depending on the
houses they
own. The ownership would naturally vary from one lagna to the
other. In
other words, for a given lagna, certain planets will behave as
benefics while
others will behave as malefics or neutrals. This will be independant
of their
inherent nature as already described. Planets thus are subservient to
 the
lagna. On the basis of the principles discussed hereunder, a natural
benefic
may assume the role of a malefic while a natural malefic may assume a
benefic role. The standard principles in this regard, as laid down by the sage
Parashara in his celebrated Brihat Parashara Hora Shastra are being given
below.
Principles - Part I
(a)Natural benefics as lords of quadrants (houses 1,4,7
and 10) shed their
beneficence.
(b)Natural malefics as lords of quadrants shed their
malefic nature.
Note:
(i)Natural benefics
 are the Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus; natural
malefics are the Sun, Mars,
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.
(ii)Lordship of
 quadrants has a neutralising influence on the nature of
planets. The natural
 benefics thus lose the capacity to give benefic
results, while the natural
malefics lose their capacity to do harm.
(iii)   Only the
ownership of quadrants does not convert benefics into
malefics, and vice versa.

<<<PAGE 88>>>
(c)Lords of trines (houses 1,5 and 9) give benefic
results no matter whether
by their inherent nature they are benefics or
malefics.
Note: Lord
of the lagna is both the lord of a quadrant and a trine. It is
thus supposed to
give benefic results irrespective of it’s inherent nature.
(d)Lords of the third, the sixth and the eleventh
houses are always malefic.
(e)Lords of the second, the twelfth and the eighth
houses behave as neutrals.
They give results according to their location as
well as association.
Note: Lords of the 2nd, 12th and 8th houses
are impressionable neutrals.
Principles - Part II
The twelve houses in a horoscope have been divided into four
 groups
above: (a) the quadrants; (b) the trines; (c) the 3, 6, 11 group; and
(d) the 2,
12, 8 group. In each group the relative strength of the various
house lords is
described thus:
(a)Of the lords of the quadrants, the 4th lord is more
powerful than the lagna
lord; the 7th lord is more powerful than the 4th lord;
and the 10th lord is
more powerful than the 7th lord.
(b)Of the trine lords, the 5th lord is more powerful
than the lagna lord, while
the 9th lord is more powerful than the 5th lord.
(c)Of the 3, 6, 11 group, the sixth lord is more
powerful than the 3rd lord
while the 11th lord is more so than the 6th lord.
(d)Of the 2, 12, 8 group, the 12th lord is more
powerful than the 2nd, while
the 8th lord is more so than the 12th.
Principles - Part III
The lord of the 8th house, though considered a neutral
 above, has a
special propensity to do evil. The eighth house represents obstructions,
obstacles, failures, intrigues, ailments, death and the like. The following
points must be remembered while considering the 8th house.
(a)Eighth house is the 12th from 9th (indicating loss
of Bhagya); hence its
lord is ever malefic.
Note:

<<<PAGE 89>>>
(i)Twelfth house
 from lagna indicates loss. Twelfth house from any
house indicates loss of that
 house. Since the ninth house stands for
Bhagya (luck), virtues, pious deeds,
 religious inclinations, father, etc.,
the twelfth from it (i.e., the 8th)
indicates the loss of all these. Loss of
fortune or luck is considered the
biggest loss.
(ii)When the 8th
 lord is also the lagna lord, the benefic nature of the
lagna lordship prevails,
 and the 8th lord tends to behave as a benefic
unless it is particularly
afflicted or ill-placed.
(b)The eighth lord is still more malefic when it also
lords over the 3rd or the
11th house.
Note:
(i)For Pisces
ascendant, Venus is the lord of the third and the 8th houses
and is bad.
(ii)For Virgo
 ascendant, Mars is the lord of the third and the eighth
houses and, therefore,
adverse.
(iii)   For Taurus
ascendant, Jupiter is the lord of the 8th and the 11th
houses, and is adverse.
(iv)   For Scorpio
ascendant, Mercury as the lord of the 8th and the 11th
houses is bad.
(c)The eighth lord becomes a benefic when it also owns
a trine.
Note:
(i)Jupiter and
 Mercury for Leo and Aquarius ascendants respectively
own the 5th and 8th
houses, and behave as benefics.
(ii)For Gemini
ascendant, Saturn as the lord of the 8th house as well as
the 9th house (a trine)
 does not become an outright benefic, and,
according to the Bhavartha Ratnakara,
gives mixed results only.
(d)The evil effects of the eighth house lordship do not
apply to the Sun or
the Moon.
Note: The Moon is the
8th lord for Sagittarius ascendant, and the Sun for
Capricorn ascendant.
According to the sage Parashara, the Sun and the
Moon remain un-afflicted by
the eighth house lordship. This, however,
may not hold true in actual practice,
at least in medical astrology.

<<<PAGE 90>>>
Principles - Part IV
(a)When a planet owns both a quadrant and a trine, it
becomes particularly
useful and is called a Raja-yoga-karaka (doer of great
 benefit). It gives
additional benefit if it is also located in a quadrant or a
trine.
Note:
(i)Mars for Cancer
 and Leo ascendants, Venus for Capricorn and
Aquarius ascendants, and Saturn for
 Taurus and Libra ascendants,
become Yoga-karakas because of the ownership of a
trine and a quadrant.
(ii)Some people
 doubt the efficacy of Saturn as a benefic for Taurus
ascendant despite its
ownership of the 9th and the 10th houses (a trine
and a quadrant respectively).
This is because the 9th lord is considered a
Badhaka (an obstructing agent) for
 a fixed lagna like Taurus. This,
however, is not the view of Parashara which,
 in our opinion, is more
authentic.
(b)Only the ownership of a quadrant does not convert a
 malefic into a
benefic. The malefic must also own a trine to completely shed
 its
malevolence.
Note: Saturn, as the
 lord of the 10th and the 11th houses for Aries
ascendant, as lord of the 3rd
and the 4th houses for Scorpio ascendant,
and as the lord of the 6th and the
7th houses for Leo ascendant, remains a
malefic despite owning a quadrant in
each case.
(c)The blemish of kendra lordship (ownership of
quadrants), as applicable to
benefics, increases progressively from the Moon,
to Mercury, to Jupiter, to
Venus.
(d)Full Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus, in this
order, are progressively
more powerful as benefics.
(e)Waning Moon, the Sun, Saturn and Mars, in this
order, are progressively
more powerful as malefics.
Principles - Part V (Raja Yogas)
When the lord of a quadrant is in some way related to the
lord of a trine,
a Raja Yoga (or a highly benefic combination) is formed.
 Benefic
combinations in a horoscope neutralise affliction and are good for remaining

<<<PAGE 91>>>
free from disease. Relationship between any two house lords can be in one
of
the following ways:
(a)By location in the same house (conjunction).
(b)By mutual aspect.
(c)By an exchange of houses (Parivartana Yoga).
(d)When one of them is placed in the other’s house and
this latter aspects the
former.
Note: When
the lords of quadrants and trines are related in one of the
ways indicated
above, they still do not produce a Raja yoga if they also
own the Papasthanas
(adverse houses), i.e., houses 3, 6 and 11.
Principles - Part VI (Rahu and
Ketu)
(a)Rahu and Ketu give results according to the house
where they are located,
and according to the planet (i.e., the lord of a house)
whom they join.
(b)Rahu and Ketu become Yogakarakas (productive of Raja
Yoga) in the
following situations:
(i)When they are
placed in a quadrant, and join a trine lord; or
(ii)When they are
placed in a trine, and join a quadrant lord.
(c)Rahu also behaves as Saturn and Ketu also as Mars.
Trika Houses and their Lords
Houses 6, 8 and 12 are known as Trika houses. While these
houses and
their lords, as well as the planets that associate with these houses
and their
lords, are productive of adverse results, they are particularly
 adverse in
relation to health. The sixth house and the sixth lord, among other
things,
indicate disease and accidents. The eighth house and the eighth lord
indicate
chronic disease, incurable disease, or death. The twelfth house and
its lord
indicate suffering and also hospitalisation. The dasha periods of the
planets
associated with these houses and their lords must be carefully watched
for
determining illness.
The Marakas (Death Inflictors)

<<<PAGE 92>>>
The Marakas are planets which are supposed to cause death.
 It has
already been stated that the eighth house governs longevity. The eighth
from
the 8th (i.e., the third house) is the alternate house of longevity. We
are also
aware that the twelfth house from any house signifies the loss of that
house.
Twelfth from the eighth house is the 7th house; twelfth from the third
house
is the 2nd. The 2nd and the 7th houses thus indicate loss of longevity,
in
other words death. These houses are called the Maraka houses. Planets
which
(i) own these houses, (ii) occupy these houses, or (iii) associate with
the
lords of these houses assume the role of Marakas or death inflictors. The
dashas and antardashas of these planets are significant in causing death. It
may be remembered, however, that death does not occur every time the
dashas and
 antardashas of these planets operate; under normal
circumstances, these dashas
disturb health.
It is appropriate to study a chart carefully and work out
the span of life
according to the standard principles of astrology. Death
 during childhood
must be excluded by judging the horoscope for Balarishta.
Thereafter, the
length of life must be classified as being Alpayu (short life;
upto 32 years),
Madhyayu (medium life; 64 years) or Poornayu (long life; 100
years). It is
the coinciding of a maraka dasha with the culmination of the span
of life that
causes death. At other times, the dashas of marakas should be
watched for
health.
It is not necessary that the time of death will always
coincide with the
dashas and antardashas of planets concerned with the second
 and seventh
houses or their lords. Other planets too can assume this role when
the dashas
of the marakas stated above are not operating. In this connection,
 the
following factors are of importance:
(a)Lord of the twelfth house;
(b)Planets associated with the lord of the twelfth
house;
(c)Antardashas of the 6th, 8th or 12th lords operating
 in the dasha of a
maraka planet;
(d)Lords of the 2nd and 12th houses from the Moon if
they happen to be
malefics;
(e)Saturn assumes the most potent maraka status when
 associated with
planets having maraka potential.

<<<PAGE 93>>>
(f)Death sometimes occurs in the dasha or antardasha of
the most malefic
planet in the horoscope.
Note:
(a)Saturn and Rahu can behave as unqualified killers if
 their dasha and
antardasha are operating at a time coinciding with the expected
span of life.
(b)A maraka planet does not kill in its dasha, in the
antardasha of a benefic
planet related to it. It can, however, kill in the
antardasha of an unrelated
malefic planet.
(c)Lords of the 2nd and the 12th houses become potent
 marakas in their
mutual dasha-antardashas.
(d)Similarly, lords of the 6th and the 8th houses can
 cause death in their
mutual dasha-antardashas.
(e)Dasha of the 8th lord occupying the ascendant is
also important.
(f)If two or more sons of a native run the Rahu dasha
 simultaneously, it
forebodes death for the native. This is a marvellous example
of the principle
of inter-related destinies.
Relationship of Planets to Various Lagnas
It is appropriate now to tabulate the relationship of
planets to the various
lagnas on the basis of the aforesaid principles.

<<<PAGE 94>>>

<<<PAGE 95>>>
Miscellaneous Adverse Factors
While the above information must suffice to decide about the
nature of a
planet, there are other factors too which need attention. This is
particularly
true of the adverse factors since a knowledge about them is of
importance in
obtaining the warning signals and taking appropriate remedial
 measures.
Some such sensitive adverse factors are mentioned below. It is
 stressed,
however, that the aim of making a mention of these is not to frighten
 a
consulter but to help him to the utmost extent by advising appropriate
corrective steps.
1. The twenty-second Drekkana: The twenty-second
 Drekkana is the
Drekkana that falls exactly seven houses away from the lagna.
It thus falls in
the 8th house on the same degrees as those of the lagna. Place
the degrees of
the lagna in the sign occupying the 8th house of the birth chart
 and
determine its Drekkana. The lord of that sign and the planets falling in
that
sign in the Drekkana chart are evil and capable of causing death and
disease.
When a Drekkana chart is cast, the 8th house of this chart indicates
the 22nd
Drekkana. The lord of this house as well as the planets falling in
that house
prove malefic.

<<<PAGE 96>>>
2. The sixty-fourth Navamsha. Whereas the 22nd
 Drekkana is calculated
from the lagna, the 64th Navamsha is calculated from the
 Moon. It falls
exactly seven houses away from the Moon. Place the degrees of
the Moon in
the sign 8th from it, and determine the Navamsha of that sign. The
lord of
that Navamsha is the lord of the 64th Navamsha, and, along with planets
falling therein in the Navamsha chart, behaves as a malefic. In the usual
Navamsha chart, the sign falling in the 4th house from the Moon happens to
be
the lord of the 64th Navamsha; this lord as also its associates, and the
planets falling in that house in the Navamsha Chart behave as evil planets.
3. Sarpa Drekkana. The second and third Drekkana
of the sign Karka, the
first and the second of the sign Vrishchika, and the
last Drekkana of the sign
Meena are termed the Sarpa (serpent) Drekkanas.
 Planets falling in these
Drekkanas tend to produce ill health during their
periods and sub-periods if
other factors also indicate thus.

<<<PAGE 97>>>

...VII...
Significations of Houses and Planets
Whatever a great man does, the same is done
 by others
too.Whatever standard he sets, the same the world follows.
Gita III/21
The twelve houses of the zodiac
represent all the aspects of existence at
the terrestrial as well as the
individual level. Likewise, the nine planets also
indicate the varied areas of
existence. In order to analyse a horoscopic chart,
it is essential to
understand what the different houses of the horoscope, and
the nine planets
located therein, signify. An understanding of the interaction
between planets
 and houses, integrated with the dasha systems and other
specific techniques,
provides a basis for accurate predictions.
An attempt is being made here to provide adequate
information about all
that the planets and the houses signify. However, this
 information is not
exclusive, particularly in view of the fact that several new
meanings must
emerge when the standard principles are applied in the modern
context. It
only underlines the fact that astrology is ever a live and
expanding subject.
Significations of the Twelve Houses
The houses from the lagna to the seventh represent the right
half of the
body of the native (and the left half of the body of his spouse).
Those from
the seventh to the lagna represent his left half, and the right half
 of his
spouse.
First
House: Body,
fame, character, strength, courage, knowledge or lack of
it, residence, place
 of birth, dignity, honour, ancestry, livelihood, the

<<<PAGE 98>>>
beginning, the present,
 wisdom, wealth, comforts and discomforts, self-
respect, peace of mind,
happiness and un-happiness, detachment, virtues and
vices, health of parents.
In medical astrology: Body in neral, limbs, complexion,
marks or moles
on the body, sound and unsound health, skin texture, longevity,
sleep, head,
brain, texture of hair, stamina.
Second
House: Wealth,
speech, physical enjoyments, trading in ornaments,
pearls and diamonds, buying
or selling in general, accumulation of wealth,
earning through self-effort,
 acquisitions from father, truthfulness and
falsehood, inclinations, food,
taste, clothes, eloquence, humility, steadiness
of mind, learning, education,
letters, anger, deceitfulness, family members,
friends, enemies, servants,
close followers, self-control, death.
In medical astrology: Face, teeth, tongue, oral cavity,
nose, nails, speech,
eyes (right eye).
Third
 House: Courage
 and valour, physical fitness, hobbies, talent,
education, good qualities,
 siblings, longevity of parents, tolerance,
capability, quality and nature of
 food, selfishness, sports, fights, refuge,
trading, dreams, sorrows, stability
of mind, neighbourhood, near relations,
friends, army, inheritance, ornaments,
cleverness, short journeys.
In medical astrology: Ears (right ear), neck, throat,
 shoulders, bones,
upper limbs, mental instability, physical growth, longevity.
Fourth
House: Near and dear ones, caste and ancestry, mother, relatives on
mother’s side, lands and houses, agriculture, farming, gardens, orchards,
installations, buildings, parliament, favours from the ruler, medicine,
education, knowledge of land and geography, hidden treasures, comforts and
discomforts, courage, faith, victory and defeat, perfumes, clothes, milk,
digging, agricultural produce, vehicles, possession of cattle, horses and
elephants.
In medical astrology: Chest, lungs, heart, breast, potent
medicine.
Fifth
 House: Progeny,
 father, mental ability, learning, knowledge,
scholarship, character,
 conception, prosperity, acquisitions through wife,
fascination (for women),
sharp wisdom, discrimination and analytical skill,
capability, devotion to
 gods, means of earning, official seal, good or bad

<<<PAGE 99>>>
memory, speculation,
 humiliation, authorship, Shruti (Vedas), Smriti,
knowledge of mantras, karmas
of past lives.
In medical astrology: Heart, upper abdomen, liver, gall
 bladder, mind,
mental illness, problems related to pregnancy.
Sixth
 House: Enemies,
 opposition, mental agitation, injuries, accident,
disease, wounds sustained in
 war, loans, debts, losses, disappointments,
obstacles, poisons, slanders,
 humiliation, cruelty, indulgence in prohibited
acts, theft, quarrels,
 imprisonment, maternal uncles, maternal aunt, step-
mother, pets, cattle,
 quadrupeds, flavours of food, servants, subordinates,
nuisances in general.
In medical astrology: Intestines, umbilical region,
 phlegmatic illness,
tuberculosis, eye disease, poisoning, accidents,
operations.
Seventh
 House: Spouse, sex partner, marriage, adultery, lust or passion,
nature and character of spouse, sexual union, secret love affairs, journey,
deviation from one’s path, partnership in business, overt enemies, quarrels,
theft, loss of memory, recovery of lost wealth, progress, attainment of status,
grandfather, brother’s son, death.
In medical astrology: Lower urinary tract, anal canal,
 semen, seminal
vesicles, urethra, prostrate, sexual act.
Eighth
 House: Marital status of a woman, longevity, death, obstacle,
disgrace,
defeat, discontinuity, suddenness, unexpectedness, misery, loss of
memory, sin,
 killing a living being, capital punishment, nature of death,
place of death,
wickedness, father’s indebtedness, deviation from expected
norms, frightful
place, difficult route, crevices, finding faults, humiliation,
wife’s wealth,
sudden unexpected gain, hidden talents, spiritual pursuits and
attainments,
inheritance, son of the elder sister.
In medical astrology: External genitalia, incurable or
 chronic disease,
loss of a limb, longevity, cause of death, severe mental
anguish.
Ninth
 House: Virtuous
 deeds, pilgrimages, worship, religious inclination,
devotional and religious
 learning, karmas of the present birth, splendour,
association with the
virtuous, auspiciousness, the preceptor or guru, father,
austerity, penance,
charity, kindness, wisdom, knowledge, devotion towards

<<<PAGE 100>>>
the preceptor, spiritual
 initiation, mental quietude, fame and fortune,
progeny, temples, Vedic rituals,
long journeys, travel by the sea.
In medical astrology: Hips, thighs, nourishment.
Tenth
 House: Profession,
 function, source of livelihood, governmental
service, honour from the king,
 business, status, wealth, political power,
fame, progress, nature of work,
 professional inclination, the treating
physician, hidden treasure, prescribed
 course, teaching capability, self-
control, dominance, sacrificing nature,
proficiency, father’s wealth and well-
being, foreign travel, financial status,
 place of residence, performance of
sacred and religious deeds.
In medical astrology: Knee joint, knee cap.
Eleventh
 House: Gains
 of all nature, income, acquisition, fulfilment of
desires, nature of earning,
 arrival, rewards, recognition, favours from the
ruler, special status,
 proficiency, learning, ancestral property, fondness for
precious stones, lost
wealth, pursuit of pious and religious deeds, profits and
returns, elder
 brother, paternal uncle, longevity of mother, material
enjoyments.
In medical astrology: Legs, left ear, left upper limb,
 recovery from
disease.
Twelfth
House:
Expenditure, loss of wealth, spending money for prescribed
or prohibited
pursuits, pleasures of the bed, bedroom, mental anguish, loss of
sleep,
physical disease, wickedness, penury, loss or disease of a limb, loss of
authority, imprisonment, confinement in an enemy’s house, loss of spouse,
exit
from the world, emancipation, renunciation, distant travel, foreign land,
emigration, loss in travel, paternal property,spiritual learning, secret
learning, fear from overt and covert enemies.
In medical astrology: Sleep disorders, mental imbalance,
hospitalisation,
feet, left eye, death.
Significations of the Planets
Planets too, like houses, have their significations. They
are as follows:
The
Sun: Physical
 strength, dominance, influence, courage, valour, bitter
taste, land,
 enlightenment, soul, father, father’s comforts, king, royal

<<<PAGE 101>>>
favours, kingly
 pursuits, high status, undisguised conduct, mental purity,
kingdom, travelling,
summer (Grishma), heat, fire, stones, trees with thorns,
grass, forests,
 mountains, eastern direction, half a year, river banks, body,
face, anger,
 indignation, hostility, good nature, administration, leader,
physician,
 competence, gold, copper, pearls, ruby, ornaments, timber,
quadruped, short
 stature, thick yarn, victory, devotion to lord Shiva,
Kshatriyas (the 2nd in
order in the four-castes system), red cloth, saffron,
lotus, cow with its calf,
the world of mortals.
In medical astrology: Soundness of health, old age, stomach,
bile, heart,
right eye, bones, fever, inflammation, diseases of the head,
 headache,
baldness, biliary disease, injuries from falls, epilepsy, injuries
sustained from
quadrupeds.
The
 Moon: Mother, comforts to and from mother, beauty, facial lustre,
gracefulness, fame, happiness, vehicles, mind, mental capabilities,
intelligence,
sense of humour, woman’s inclination, mental agility, nature of
an individual,
contentment, laziness, sleep, liquids,water, milk, curd, honey,
saline, eating,
 delicious fruits, fish and aquatic animals, snakes and other
reptiles, flowers,
 perfumes, blossoms, fine clothes, white colour, crystals,
silver, bronze,
 pearls, royal insignia, well, tank, lake, expanses of water,
pilgrimage,
 pleasures, splendour, shyness, modesty, mildness, kindness,
love, lover,
 affection, royal favour, wheat, white rice, sugarcane, salt,
Brahmins,
 north-west direction, rainy season (Varsha), a muhurta (a time
period
equivalent to 48 minutes), middle age, world of the Manes.
In medical astrology: Mental llness, epilepsy, ulcers,
acidity, phlegmatic
disorders, pleurisy, tuberculosis, blood disorders, breast,
 left eye, malarial
fever, fevers associated with chills and rigors, sleep
 disorders, menstrual
problems, disease of shoulders, fear from watery animals.
Mars: Courage, valour,
 aggressiveness, anger, physical strength, pride,
arrogance, combat,
administrative capability, capacity to award punishment,
skill in the use of
weapons, risky ventures, archery, leadership, dominance,
fame, victory, army,
 fort, cruelty, adultery, strength of the enemy, king, a
fool, arguments, injury,
surgery, criticism of others, sword, an axe or hatchet,
knife, leadership of a
 village or a town, royal, famous, commander of an
army, independance,
 controlling wild animals, non-vegetarian food, fickle
nature, heat, summer
 (Grishma), southern direction, burns, fire,

<<<PAGE 102>>>
steadfastness, service of the
 ruler, home, a house, land, soil, burnt place,
earthenware, goldsmith, gold,
 copper, good food, craving, persistence,
obstinacy, speech, siblings
 (especially younger ones), snake, red colour,
blood, gore, red clothes, red
flowers, poison, bitter taste, pungent taste, sight,
day, tree.
In medical astrology: Bile, marrow, haemoglobin (red pigment
 in the
blood), muscles, menstrual cycle in women, accidents, injuries, burns,
surgical operations, biliary disease, blood disorders, cuts and wounds,
dysuria, head injuries, physical fitness and vitality.
Mercury: 
Education,
knowledge, 
learning, 
sholarship, 
grammer,
mathematics, astrology, astronomy,
writing, script, philosophical knowledge,
oratory, speech, good conversation,
 power of expression, witty language,
intelligence, humility, fear,
 discrimination, editorship, printer, a minister,
conversation studded with
multiple meanings, a trader, commerce, treasury,
pilgrimage, temples, bad
dreams, sculptor, religious rites, devotion, mental
quietude, fickleness,
 friends, black magic, self control, birds, horses,
knowledge of scriptures and
Vedanta, renunciation, skill in mantras, yantras
as well as tantric pursuits,
 dancing, substances of mixed hues, eunuch,
Shudras (the last in order in
four-caste system), seasons, autumn (Sharad),
skin moisture, northern
direction, green colour, a prince, a youth, a child,
maternal uncle, maternal
grandfather, younger coborns, physician, towers of
temples, dust, balanced
outlook, skill in precious stones, crosswise looks.
In medical astrology: Skin, diseases of the skin, navel,
 sexual organs,
neck, throat, nose, lungs, mental aberrations, nervous
 breakdown, speech
disorders, vertigo, impotence.
Jupiter: Successors, sons and
 daughters, grandchildren, disciples, wealth,
treasure, classical learning,
philosophical learning, judicial learning, Sanskrit
language, higher education,
astrology, astronomy, grammer, Shastras, logic,
religious study, Dharma or
 righteous conduct, status, grandfather, elders,
teachers, Brahmins (the 1st in
order in four-caste system), old age, place of
pilgrimage, sharp intellect,
 wisdom, proficiency, eloquence, fame and
renown, capacity to understand,
self-respect, arrogance, indignation, writer
of books, long poems, mantras or
incantations, lecturing and delighting an
audience, helpful nature, a man of
 law, a judge, devotion, beneficence,
penance, self control, royal throne,
 physical health, valour, progress,

<<<PAGE 103>>>
understanding the minds of others, knowledge
 of scriptures, decorations,
yellow cloth, yellow topaz, yellow colour, precious
 stones, gold, honey,
turmeric, salt, cows, buffaloes, elephants, chariot,
 mansion, elder brother,
friends, north-east direction, early half of winter
 (Hemanta), spending on
sacred deeds, charities, trader, fat in the body.
In medical astrology: Diseases of liver and gall bladder,
obesity, diabetes,
pancreas and spleen, disease of digestive organs, knee,
 anaemias, ear
trouble, laziness, chronic disease.
Venus: Wife, woman,
marriage, conjugal bliss, sexual adventures, romantic
conversation, amorous
sports, love sports in water, overindulgence in sex,
sexual perversions,
 romance, adultery, possessing many women, beauty,
youth, fame, flowers, love of
 fragrances, tenderness, dealing in perfumes,
clothes and articles of beauty,
 pride in ancient culture, servants, fortune,
kingdom, royal favours, radiance,
ornaments, talents, wealth, knowledge of
the scriptures, diamonds, pearls,
cotton, physical comforts, fame, fine arts,
music, dance, singing, poetry,
 drama, vehicles, elephants, horses, cattle,
playing on flute or
 violin,voluptuous gait, well-proportioned limbs, spring
season (Vasanta),
 south-east direction, middle age, agriculture, family
members, bedroom, white
 flowers, ghee, curd, gold, silver, land, good
fortune, good food, the Vaishyas
(3rd in order in the four-caste system).
In medical astrology: Venereal disease, eye disease,
 diseases of the
urinary system, intestinal disease, diabetes, typhoid,
 appendicitis,
exhaustion.
Saturn:
 Longevity, sufferings, misery, ill-health, obstruction, sorrow,
distress, death, humiliation, servility, stupidity, covetousness, allegation,
punishment, incarceration, outcaste, a maid servant, separation, slavery,
falsehood, illiteracy, exhaustion, exertion, indignation, ugliness, dirty
dress,
shabby looks, eunuch, illegitimate, sins, cruelty, skill in law and
judiciary,
renunciation, detachment, philosophical attitude, directed
 downwards,
Shudras, western direction, second half of winter (Shishira), means
 of
livelihood, old age, infamy, firmness, indebtedness, penury, income,
association with the wicked, benefit from inferiors, hunter, a wanderer,
horses, elephants, goats, buffaloes, asses, dogs, oil, wood, black metal, iron,
lead, black grains, precious stones, ashes, agriculture or farming, sexual

<<<PAGE 104>>>
indulgence, happiness from a woman, long lasting, the servant class,
multitudes, labourers.
In medical astrology: Chronic disease, incurable disease,
 legs, feet,
tendons, skin, ugly hair, lameness, mutilated limbs, amputation,
depression,
insanity, idiocy, exhaustion and fatigue.
Rahu: Sudden happening,
 disinclination, faulty logic, harsh speech,
irreligious, adultery with a wicked
woman, falsehood, sin, wickedness, royal
status, royal insignia, benefits from
 outcastes, foreign travel or residence,
long travel, pilgrimage, a muhurta (48
 minutes), air, space, breathing, old
age, hesitation, poison, snakes, reptiles,
south-west direction, wandering in
difficult terrain, going to the mountains,
 maternal grandfather, gambling,
blue cloth, dark flower, emerald, dense forest,
 sudden disaster, technical
eduction.
In medical astrology: Bones, chronic disease, incurable
disease, insanity,
hiccup, phobias, leprosy, weeping wounds, poisoning, snake
bites, malignant
tumors.
Ketu: Knowledge of the self,
renunciation, knowledge of the mantras and
tantras, secret learning,
detachment, bath in holy rivers, pilgrimage, penance,
hunger, vow of silence,
 Vedantic philosophy, disease, physician, a flag,
association with hunters,
 fortune, suffering, luxuries, paternal grandfather,
vultures, dogs, deer,
cocks, pain, injury, surgical treatment, horned animals,
thorn, stone, trouble
from enemies.
In medical astrology: Chronic disease, tuberculosis, viral
 diseases,
eruptive fevers, epidemics, worm infestations, non-healing wounds,
mental
instability, diseases causing diagnostic confusion.
Planets as Significators for Houses
Each of the twelve houses has one or more significators or
Karakas for it.
A significator is an additional indicator of the functions of a
house. A house
may have more than one significator. The various significators
for different
houses are as follows:
Lagna = Sun
Second House = Jupiter

<<<PAGE 105>>>
Third House = Mars
Fourth House = Moon, Mercury
Fifth House = Jupiter
Sixth House = Mars, Saturn
Seventh House = Venus
Eighth House = Saturn
Ninth House = Sun, Jupiter
Tenth House = Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn
Eleventh House = Jupiter
Twelfth House = Saturn
Predictive use of significators
A significator for a house must be considered when events
pertaining to a
house are being judged. For example, when one wants to know
about mother
(4th house), the Moon (significator for 4th house as well as
mother) must
also be examined. Or while judging in respect of brother (3rd
house), Mars
(significator for 3rd house as well as brother) must also be
judged. Besides,
the following scheme must be adhered to:
1. Whatever is considered from the 9th (father), the
10th and the 11th houses
from the lagna, must also be examined from the 9th,
10th and 11th from the
Sun.
2. Whatever is considered from the 1st, the 2nd, the
4th, the 9th and the 10th
houses from the lagna, must also be considered from
similar houses from the
Moon.
3. Whatever is considered from the 3rd from lagna, must
also be considered
from the 3rd house from Mars.
4. Whatever is considered from the 6th house (disease,
 enemy, maternal
uncle) from the lagna must also be judged from the 6th from
Mercury.
5. For progeny, consider the 5th house from lagna and
the 5th from Jupiter.
6. For spouse, consider the 7th from lagna and the 7th
from Venus.

<<<PAGE 106>>>
7. Indications of the 8th (death, longevity) and the
12th from the lagna must
be considered from such houses from Saturn also.
8. Whatever be the indications of the house, these must
also be judged from
the lord of that house.
