# source: _OceanofPDF.com_27_Stars_27_Gods_The_Astrological_Mythology_of_Ancient_India_-_Vic_DiCara.pdf
# pages: 60-161
# compiled into: nakshatras.json (deity, shakti)
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 60>>>
60 
“I am sorry for fighting with you, but I am a serpent, so it is my nature to 
become aggressive when challenged. It is so difficult for a person not to 
be a creature of habit. Please forgive me.  
“You create the forces that create our habitual nature; that is why no 
one can overcome habit by their willpower alone. You are the wise 
being who frees everyone from bondage to their habitual conditioning. 
So, whether you punish me or show me mercy – either is for my benefit.” 

<<<PAGE 61>>>
61 
Inherited Power ~ Maghā  
 
Name
Maghā
Meaning
Power
Symbol
Throne
Deity
Pitṛ- ancestral spirits
Main Star
Regulus
 

<<<PAGE 62>>>
62 
The word magha means “power” and also means “gift.” The symbol of 
Maghā, a throne, is an image of inherited power. Indra, the king of the 
gods, seated on the throne of paradise is known as Maghavan. But it is 
the Pitṛ (ancestral spirits) who are the deities of Maghā – signifying that 
we inherit power from our ancestors. 
Maghā bestows gifts “from our ancestors.” This literally 
indicates inheritance of power, career, fortune, and qualities 
(“DNA”). Such inheritance really comes as a result of efforts 
made in our previous births, so Maghā also indicates powers, 
qualities and abilities carried over from past lives.  
Divine “Ancestors”  
The Manu-Smṛti’s third chapter tells us that Pitṛ are divine beings who 
are the “forefathers” of us all. It says that some of Brahmā’s initial 
mental offspring created the Pitṛ, who in turn created powerful beings, 
who in turn produced the original members of the various species in the 
universe.  
So the Pitṛ are an intermediary being between the original mental 
offspring of Brahmā and the subsequent physical offspring that created 
the gods, humans, animals, etc. 
The Purāṇas, especially Vāyu and Brahmāṇḍa, describe many types of 
Pitṛ: 
1) Original Pitṛ – divine ancestors;  
a) Forefathers of non-humans 
i) 
…of the divine race called Sādhya 
ii) …of the gods 
iii) …of the anti-gods and similar supernatural beings 
b) Forefathers of humans 
i) 
…of intellectuals 
ii) …of rulers 

<<<PAGE 63>>>
63 
iii) …of producers 
iv) …of workers14 
2) Souls of deceased human ancestors who become Pitṛ. 
The main concern of the Pitṛ, regardless of their type, is to bring peace 
and prosperity to the souls of their descendants when we die and have 
to transition between one lifetime and the next. They perform sacrifices, 
prayers and meditations to pacify the chaos and confusion which tends 
to befall newly deceased souls. 
The foremost of all the Pitṛ is Aryamā. In Bhagavad Gītā (10.29) Śrī Kṛṣṇa 
says: 
pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi 
“Among the Pitṛ, I am Aryamā.” 
We will discuss Aryamā in more detail, because he has his own star very 
close by, Uttara Phālgunī. 
The Afterlife 
Garuḍa Purāṇa’s 14th chapter relates: 
The god of death, Yama is the master of the Pitṛ’s world, pitṛ-loka – the 
afterlife realm, which is “below” the earthly realm but “above” the 
nether-paradise of the Nāga.  
The Pitṛ guide the soul through the afterlife, which contains experiences 
akin to our modern western concepts of heaven and hell. The Pitṛ help 
deceased souls face Yama, the god of death, who judges their deeds and 
rewards and punishes them accordingly.  
                                                          
14 The four types of Pitṛ who are forefathers of humans were created by 
Brahmā’s sons, Bhṛgu, Angiras, Pulastya, and Vasiṣṭha, respectively. The three 
types of Pitṛ who are forefathers of non-humans were created by Viṣṇu, 
Brahmā, and Atri, respectively.   

<<<PAGE 64>>>
64 
To help correct specific wrongs, Yama sends the soul into any of the 28 
“hells” of pitṛloka. To encourage and reward good deeds, Yama sends 
the soul into the “heaven” of pitṛloka where they enjoy heavenly 
delights with bodies similar to the gods.  
When the due rewards and punishments are exhausted, Yama usually 
sends a soul to its next earthly birth. Occasionally, Yama will keep a soul 
for an extended period, promoting it into the ranks of the Pitṛ, or 
another type of divinity in some other realm. 
Ancestor Worship 
In ancient India, the Pitṛ were worshipped with approximately equal 
importance as the gods, but the rituals were different. Rituals for 
worshipping the Pitṛ are called śrāddha and always involve grains. 15 
Indeed the word magha can even connote “grain.” 
The śrāddha ritual highlights the mutual indebtedness between 
ancestor and offspring. In Vedic culture, it is the duty of every child to 
have at least one child of his own. This is how we repay our debt to the 
ancestors who paved the way for our birth, and it helps insure success 
of the Pitṛ’s original duty: to populate the universe. 
The divine “ancestors” help guide us through the afterlife when we die, 
and when our literal ancestors die it is our duty to make an effort to 
help them. Therefore a child performs śrāddha on behalf of his 
deceased parents. The ceremony worships not the deceased but the Pitṛ 
who will make the effort to ease the passing of the deceased. 
                                                          
15 The śrāddha ceremony is still very popluar among Hindus, and is observed 
twice a year, during the waning moon of two months: Aśvina and Caitra. It also 
continues to have a strong influent in Buddhism, even as far as Japan. 

<<<PAGE 65>>>
65 
Romantic Enjoyment ~  
Pūrva Phālgunī  
 
Name
Pūrva Phālgunī
Meaning
Reddish Lady (I)
Symbol
Bed
Deity
Bhaga - god of love and marriage
Main Stars
δ and θ Leonis.
 

<<<PAGE 66>>>
66 
Pūrva Phālgunī is one of two consecutive nakṣatra named Phālgunī, and 
is thus our first encounter with a nakṣatra pair. As is usually the case 
with nakṣatra pairs, the first in the pair is prefixed as Pūrva Phālgunī 
(“the first Phālgunī”), and the second is Uttara Phālgunī (“the later/ 
second Phālgunī”). Paired nakṣatra share similar meanings, with subtle 
differences.  
The word phālgunī means “reddish lady,” which should remind us of the 
nakṣatra named Rohiṇī, since that word has the same meaning. As we 
noted while discussing Rohiṇī, the Vedic implication of “reddish lady” is 
a pubescent girl, fertile and eager to enjoy sexuality and procreation. It 
is therefore quite fitting that the symbol for both Phālgunī nakṣatras is a 
bed, and that their deities are gods of romance and marriage! 
Pūrva Phālgunī is the domain of Bhaga - the god of love and marriage. 
The word bhaga means:  
• 
A patron; a gracious, generous lord 
• 
Good fortune, prosperity, happiness 
• 
Beauty and loveliness 
• 
Love, lust, Eros 
• 
Vulva 
Through Pūrva Phālgunī, Bhaga graciously dispenses happiness to 
humanity, via love and marriage. With its symbolic bed and its name 
depicting a fertile young lady, Pūrva Phālgunī is the star of happy lovers, 
romance, and marriage. 
A Family of Expert Enjoyers 
The names of Bhaga’s wife, sons and daughters reveal the ways Bhaga 
bestows romantic happiness to us.  
Bhaga’s three sons are: 

<<<PAGE 67>>>
67 
• 
Mahiman – greatness, majesty and hugeness 
• 
Vibhu – solid, penetrating, and effective 
• 
Prabhu - powerful, capable, and enduring  
These names reveal the traits a male must possess to fully enjoy 
romantic happiness: Size (Mahiman) is literal in terms of stature and 
sexual organ but also indicates size of character: nobility and morality. 
Solidity (Vibhu) also has obvious physical and sexual meaning, as well as 
indicating ideal male character. Power (Prabhu) grants initiative and 
mastery which is important physically, sexually and socially.  
Bhaga’s three daughters are:  
• 
Suvratā – dedication, virtue and compliance 
• 
Varāroha – beauty, mounting, and attractive hips 
• 
Āśīs – desire and fulfillment 
These names reveal the essential traits a female must bring to the 
romantic partnership. She must be dedicated (Suvratā), indicating virtue, 
patience and receptivity. She must be beautiful (Varāroha), indicating 
attractive hips and expertise in “mounting” and “riding”. Finally, she 
must be desirable (Āśīs), which indicates that she has an appetite for 
romance and that she is therefore capable of fulfilling romantic desires. 
The name of Bhaga’s wife indicates what both genders must possess if 
they are to truly enjoy happiness together:  
• 
Siddhi –perfection, unusual skill, and dexterity  
This word, siddhi, has strong spiritual implications, indicating that 
romantic pleasure is not an end in and of itself, but a part of what we 
need in our greater journey towards a more significant and spiritual 
understanding of love and pleasure.  

<<<PAGE 68>>>
68 
Pūrva Phālgunī allows one to develop dexterity and skill in these 
talents, arts, and character traits so as to enjoy a fulfilling and 
satisfying sensual and romantic life. 
Negative Effects of Lust 
The Mahābhārata (Sauptika Parva) tells the following story of Bhaga 
angering Rudra: 
At the end of a divine age, the gods came together to divide up the 
surplus shares of sacrifices they had received. The eagerness to enjoy 
made them feel that they could leave Rudra out of the divvy.  
When Rudra learned of this, he became furious and attacked. Those 
who were most lusty to enjoy the sacrificial portions were his main 
target. He cut off the hands of the god named Savitā, who was lusty to 
feel and grab all the resources for sense gratification. He took out the 
teeth of the god named Pūṣā, who was lusty to enjoy fine delicacies. He 
plucked out the eyes of Bhaga, who was lusty to look upon attractive 
forms. 
The apologies of the gods finally placated Rudra and he was eventually 
pleased to return these to their owners. 
The story illustrates that the desire to enjoy what Pūrva Phālgunī 
offers can easily bewilder us into greed and lust, the result of 
which is the opposite of happiness and bliss. Thus we must be on 
guard to maintain the primary male and female qualities of 
nobility (mahiman) and restraint (suvratā). 
Divine Love and Romance 
In modern times, with the rise of extremely dualistic concepts of religion, 
we tend to conceive of a huge gulf between mater and spirit, god and 
pleasure, etc. This divisive conception was not embraced by Vedic 
culture. Certainly dualism has some relevance, for not all things are 
identical. Selfishness and selflessness, for example, are polar opposites 

<<<PAGE 69>>>
69 
– and thus so are lust and love. However, the Indian concept of divinity 
neutralizes, harmonizes, and integrates all opposites. 
Bhaga is the god of “material” things such as romance, sex and marriage. 
Yet the word bhaga in the form “Bhagavān” is the most common 
classical Sanskrit term for a blessed being. The Purāṇas even define 
Bhagavān as a moniker of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, in 
Sanskrit culture, the division between material and spiritual transforms. 
Bhagavān means, “The possessor of Bhaga.” Sanskrit culture conceives 
of the Supreme Spirit as a being that has more Bhaga than anyone else: 
a blissful, attractive, talented and romantic entity.  
Parāśara Muni defines the word Bhagavān in Viṣṇu Purāṇa (6.5.79): “To 
fully possess happiness (bhaga) one must have all majesty, power, fame, 
beauty, knowledge and detachment.” 
Bhaga gives majesty – which means status, influence and wealth. He 
gives power – which means heroism, bravery and strength. Bhaga also 
gives fame – which means celebrity and good reputation. He also gives 
beauty – which attracts others to participate in ones pleasures. 
Money, power, fame, beauty… these first four are obvious and well 
known ingredients of a person who can enjoy great pleasures. 
Knowledge is a lesser known requirement. We need expertise and skill 
to really enjoy the pleasures of life. Bhaga, the god of pleasures, also 
gives detachment – because attachment causes suffering. If we are only 
attached to enjoying pleasures, we will inevitably suffer. To be detached 
requires knowledge of what one really is – a spiritual being, not just a 
collection of senses to please. So in addition to giving money, power, 
fame, and beauty, Bhaga also gives knowledge and detachment. The 
complete package of six traits grants supreme pleasure. 

<<<PAGE 70>>>
70 
The personality of Godhead, especially in the intimate form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, 
is recognized by Parāśara and his son Vyāsa as the person most fit to be 
named Bhagavān.16 
Pūrva Phālgunī has the special ability to grant pleasures and 
wealth in a manner that befits a spiritually progressive person. It 
also can incline one to more deeply appreciate the spiritual 
pleasures and opulence of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.  
Bhaga and Bhakti 
Again, to highlight how Indian theology does not stringently divide 
pleasure and happiness from spirituality: the Sanskrit word for romantic 
love and pleasure (bhaga) is made of the same root that makes the 
word for the yoga of divine love (bhakti). 
Bhakti means loving the All-Attractive Divinity in very tangible, intimate 
manner which includes and really culminates its brilliance in romantic 
forms of love. 
Pūrva Phālgunī thus has a special fertility for producing bhaktas. 
For example, Arjuna, the most famous dear friend of Kṛṣṇa, was 
born on a lunar day when the Moon spanned both phālgunī 
stars.17  
The primary Indian calendar ties the lunar phases and the 27 stars to 
earthly days via the sunrise. The phase and star of the moon at the 
time of sunrise becomes the phase of that day, even if the actual 
phase itself changes before the next sunrise. Sometimes odd things 
happen: If the Sun rises when the moon is at the very end of Star A, 
the moon’s normal motion can carry it through Star B and just into the 
very beginning of Star C by the time the next Sunrise happens. In this 
                                                          
16 Parāśara says so in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa. Vyāsa says so in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 
1.3.28 
17 In Mahābhārata Virata Parva, Section 44 Arjuna says to his daughter in law: 
“I am known as Phalguna, my dear, because I was born in the snowy season on 
a day belonging to both Uttara- and Purva-Phalguni.“ 
 
 

<<<PAGE 71>>>
71 
case Star B gets “skipped” that month. Or, if the Sun rises when the 
Moon is at the very beginning of Star A, it can still be just at the very 
end of Star A when the next sunrise occurs. In this case Star A gets 
“stretched” to cover two consecutive days in that month.  
 
It is uncommon to be born on such days, but much more uncommon 
to be born when those days involve the few paired stars. Arjuna says 
he was born on a winter day when the Moon did exactly that; passed 
through two paired star-clusters – Pūrva and Uttara Phālgunī – in a 
single day.  This earned him the name Phālguna. 
 
The Phalgunis are stars of entertainment and friendship. Arjuna was a 
dashing hero, and a skilled dancer and musician. As for friendship, 
Arjuna is well known as a dear, dear friend of All-Attractive Śrī Krishna. 
 

<<<PAGE 72>>>
72 
Vows of Friendship ~  
Uttara Phālgunī 
 
Name
Uttara Phālgunī
Meaning
Reddish Lady (II)
Symbol
Bed
Deity
Aryamā - god of vows and weddings
Main Star
Denebola
  

<<<PAGE 73>>>
73 
Uttara Phālgunī is the second in the Phālgunī pair of stars. Most of what 
we discussed about Pūrva Phālgunī applies to Uttara Phālgunī as well. 
The difference is that while the previous Phālgunī tends towards 
romance, Uttara Phālgunī towards friendship and marriage. 
Uttara Phālgunī is the star of marriage and commitments. 
The deity of Uttara Phālgunī is Aryamā, the brother of Pūrva Phālgunī’s 
deity, Bhaga. As you may recall from the chapter on Maghā, In 
Bhagavad Gītā (10.29), Śrī Kṛṣṇa suggests that Aryamā is the foremost 
Pitṛ:  pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi, “Among the Pitṛs I am Aryamā.” 
This reveals that Aryamā dwells with and functions like the Pitṛ, well-
wishing ancestors who protect us in difficult times. Aryamā is the 
foremost well-wisher and protector. 
The word aryamā literally means a dear friend. The exact, most specific 
meaning is, a friend who asks a girl to marry his friend. If a boy has a 
crush on a girl, his close friend goes to the girl and tells her about the 
boy in such a way as to attract her attention and affections. That friend 
is “aryamā”. 
It is somewhat fitting that such a friend would never be mentioned in 
the Vedas as a solitary being, but is always addressed in relationship to 
his dear brothers: Bhaga, Mitra and Varuṇa. 
Aryamā is the divine matchmaker. He pairs young men and women so 
that they can enjoy what Phālgunī has to offer: love, romance and 
marriage. 
Uttara Phālgunī produces matchmakers and expert councilors in 
the arts of love and romance.  
Wedding Vows 
Ṛg Veda (2.27.5) says that Aryamā brings enjoyment even in the face of 
difficulties. This is very important for marriage, because the relationship 
between opposite principles, male and female, is rarely without 

<<<PAGE 74>>>
74 
challenges. Aryamā is the love and affection which transforms such 
challenges into delightful romantic exchanges. 
The next mantra says that the paths of Aryamā and Mitra are smooth.18 
The next mantra says that Aryamā’s path is beautiful and loving, beyond 
hatred. Then, the next confirms that Aryamā’s path is particularly 
beautiful. 
Uttara Phālgunī especially makes relationships beautiful, 
smooth and enjoyable; easing disagreements and promoting 
accord, harmony and felicity.  
The traditional Vedic wedding begins with an invocation to Aryamā, and 
is followed by one to Aryamā and Bhaga together (gods of the two 
Phālgunī stars). The would-be groom sends two elders on his behalf to 
the father of the girl he wishes to marry, to ask for her hand in marriage. 
This is exactly the meaning of “aryamā”: a friend who asks for a girl to 
marry his friend. When asking his two elders to act in this role, the 
would-be groom recites two Vedic mantras invoking Aryamā and. 
Ṛg (10.32.1): “Go straight to the target, bearing great and very satisfying 
gifts. Let these two reach their target happy and nourished!”  
Ṛg (10.85.23): “Seek the bride and bring her to the groom. Travel 
smoothly to her with Aryamā and Bhaga.” 
                                                          
18 The Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa says that the Milky Way is this smooth path. 

<<<PAGE 75>>>
75 
Dexterity ~ Hasta 
 
Name
Hasta
Meaning
Hand, grasp
Symbol
Hand
Deity
Savitā - god of sunrise
Main Stars
The hand-like Corvus constellation
 

<<<PAGE 76>>>
76 
The word hasta refers to a hand, the part of the body that grasps, 
moves, manipulates, and utilizes things. So the symbol of Hasta, a hand, 
simply illustrates its direct meaning. 
Hasta is the star of heightened awareness and dexterity. 
Savitā is Hasta’s deity. He is the god of sunrise, who wakes us up and 
inspires us to use our hands. 
The word savitā means the awakener. It is made from the root śu which 
means “to inspire.” Savitā inspires our awakening to awareness. 
Savitā is connected with the Sunrise because when the Sun rises, we 
wake up. Light floods the world and we become aware of our 
surroundings. Ṛg Veda consistently treats Savitā – the agent bestowing 
cognition - as the Sun, particularly the rising Sun.  
Eleven hymns in Ṛg Veda are entirely in honor of Savitā, and he is 
mentioned about 170 times throughout the book! Here are some that 
are relevant. 
10.158.3: “Divine Savitā gives us sight as if from the mountaintop, and 
enables us to create.” 
Hasta creates “vision” (broad, far-reaching, and ambitious), and 
the dexterity to such visionary goals. 
10.158.4: “[Savitā] puts vision in our eyes, into our bodies, into our 
world.” 
By spreading rays of light, the awakening sun (Savitā) enables our eyes 
to see the world. Similarly the soul spreads rays of sentience through 
our body and thus enables us to be conscious of our existence. Savitā is 
thus light and consciousness. 

<<<PAGE 77>>>
77 
Hasta grants heightened awareness. We become observant and 
difficult to deceive. We become more skilled, expert, and 
dexterous.19  
10.149 is an entire hymn describing Savitā as the creator of the earth 
and heavens. Modern thought also considers the Sun to be the force 
which enabled primordial elements to form into planets, including the 
earth. 
10.139.1-2: “Blonde Savitā rises in the east, spreading rays of eternal 
light by which we can nourish our desires like a cowherder. Shining 
upon the mortal world, the heavens, and the space between; he sets 
our sights upon the fertile pastures that spread from the east to the 
west, from within to without.” 
The Ṛg Veda here describes the rays of the Sun as harikeśa. This means 
that (a) the sunlight is like the golden-blonde mane of the Sun, (b) Savitā 
is blonde haired, (c) the sun’s light originates from the brilliant rays of 
Hari, the Godhead.  
Through Hasta, Savitā enables humanity to prosper by 
awakening to the new dawn, setting goals for the “day” and 
skillfully accomplishing them.  
Brahmā Gayatrī 
One part of Ṛg Vedic culture that has survived and thrived even up to 
today is a mantra from its third book which has become known as the 
savitṛ mantra, or the brahma gayatrī mantra. This mantra is ideal for 
communing with Savitā and unlocking the highest potentials of his star, 
Hasta.  
Taittiriya Aranyaka (2.11.1-8) states that mantras recited spiritually 
must be prefixed with key words that unlock their spiritual significance. 
                                                          
19 Many attribute “magicians” to Hasta. Hasta indeed gives dexterity to utilize 
slight-of-hand, and the awareness to details that others miss amidst the smoke 
and mirrors. 

<<<PAGE 78>>>
78 
“Oṁ” is always to be the first syllable in the prefix. It identifies the 
spiritual fountainhead of all things, the Divine Being. Next, special 
syllables called vyāhṛti are to be affixed. These are the “utterances” 
which identify the “worlds” or levels of consciousness that set the 
context for the mantra to be chanted. The first three worlds are the 
most important, and so are called the mahā-vyāhṛti (“great utterance”). 
These are the words bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ - identifying heaven, earth, and 
the space in between. Next comes the mantra itself, Ṛg Veda (3.62.10). 
The complete Brahmā Gayatrī thus assembled is: 
oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ  
tát savitúr váreṇ(i)yaṃ 
bhárgo devásya dhīmahi 
dhíyo yó naḥ pracodáyāt 
Invoking Divinity 
In the heavens, on earth and in the space between: 
Upon that most excellent form of Savitā, 
the effulgence of divinity, we meditate. 
And by this meditation he becomes manifest to us. 
What is “the most excellent form of Savitā (savitur vareṇiyam)?” As we 
know Savitā is the sun, which gives light and thus awareness. The most 
excellent form of awareness is to be conscious of divinity (bhargo 
devasya).  The Sun lights the heavens, the earth and the space between. 
Similarly the most excellent form of consciousness shows us the divine 
everywhere, at all times. By meditating upon the most excellent form of 
consciousness, it becomes our own consciousness! 
The highest potential for Hasta is to awaken a human being to 
grasp what this mantra describes: all-pervasive, all-
encompassing consciousness of the divine.  
Another relevant mantra for Hasta: Indian custom is, upon awakening in 
the morning, to rub ones hands together, look at them, and say:  

<<<PAGE 79>>>
79 
karāgre vasate lakṣmiḥ  
karamadhye sarasvati  
karamūle tu govindaḥ  
prabhāte karadarśanam 
“I look at my hands and realize that Lakṣmi (Goddess of Fortune) is at 
the top, Sarasvati (Goddess of Learning) is in the middle, but Govinda is 
at the root.” 
This mantra reminds us that our hands produce money (Lakṣmi) as a 
result of our skill (Sarasvati), but we are powerless to do anything 
without the blessing of Viṣṇu (Govinda). 

<<<PAGE 80>>>
80 
Multifaceted Brilliance ~ Citrā 
 
Name
Citrā
Meaning
Splendid
Symbol
Multifaceted jewel
Deity
Tvaṣṭā - god of design & creation
Main Star
Spica
 

<<<PAGE 81>>>
81 
The word citrā means: excellent, brilliant, prismatic, multifarious, 
multifaceted, wondrous, and ingenious. Appropriately, the symbol of 
Citrā is an excellent gemstone, ingeniously cut into many facets to 
reveal its wondrous prismatic luster. The Deity of Citrā is Tvaṣṭā, the god 
of creations which resemble that expertly cut jewel. 
Through Citrā, Tvaṣṭā empowers humanity to comprehend 
multi-faceted designs, and generate masterpieces and 
technological marvels. 
The Creation of Creativity 
Tvaṣṭā is one of several Vedic deities who exist in a primordial, abstract 
form and later take a specific shape at some early point in universal 
history. For example:  
• 
Primordial Aditi, the goddess of Punarvasu, is the abstract 
principle of space itself, a domain in which things can exist. 
Later she takes a concrete form as a goddess born as a grand-
daughter of Brahmā. 
• 
Primodial Savitā, the god of Hasta, is the abstract principle of 
conscious awareness. Later he takes a concrete form as a god 
born from Aditi. 
• 
Tvaṣṭā, the deity of Citrā, is similar. In primordial form Tvaṣṭā is 
the abstract power to create. Later on he becomes the god of 
creative expertise, taking concrete form as a god born from 
Aditi.  
The abstract, primordial forms of gods exist prior to tangible creation, 
and thus prior to Brahmā. Logically, the abstract power to create must 
exist before anything can be created. So the abstract form of Tvaṣṭā 
exists before Brahmā, and Brahmā must use Tvaṣṭā’s energy to design 
and create the universe in which Tvaṣṭā soon takes birth as a tangible 
being. That is why the Vedas can call Tvaṣṭā “the Creator” without 
contradicting the idea that Brahmā is the creator. 

<<<PAGE 82>>>
82 
This symbiotic relationship between Brahmā and Tvaṣṭā causes 
their stars, Rohiṇī and Citrā, to share the same symbiosis. When 
both stars are simultaneously active, they bestow ample 
amounts of artistry and skill in creative design. 
Tvaṣṭā actually takes two concrete forms in the universe. One, named 
Viśvakarmā, creates for the gods. The other, named Maya, creates for 
the anti-gods. 20  
Viśvakarmā literally means “the one who creates everything.” Māyā 
(which derives from the root, maya) means “art, extraordinary talent.” 
The word then refers to “magic” and from there to “sorcery, trickery 
and illusion.” As Viśvakarmā and Maya, Tvaṣṭā creates many fantastic 
beings and all the art, magic and technology of the gods and anti-gods. 
These creations fascinate, bewilder and confound all who look upon 
them. 
Wondrous Creations 
Citrā is the star of architects, designers and engineers. Here are some 
details Citrā’s deity, Viśvakarmā, to help drive this point home, 
illustrating how much expertise with technology, details, designs, etc. 
resides in Citrā. 
Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.15) describes Viśvakarmā as the chief designer of all the 
buildings, parks, statues and artwork in paradise. He created for the 
                                                          
20 The original name, Tvaṣṭā, can be used for either but in practice seems to 
always refer to Maya. Some accounts (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.15 and Kathāsarit Sāgara 
Kālambaka.8) describe Maya as the “son” of Viśvakarmā, indicating that the 
creator for the gods created the creator for the anti-gods. Besides Maya, 
another son of Viśvakarmā is Nala, a monkey who designed the bridge that 
spanned from India to Lanka, which Rāma used to attack Rāvaṇa. 
 
An interesting contention is that Maya built great cities in what is now Latin 
America, founded the Mayan culture, and created their calendar. The classic 
Indian astronomy textbook, Sūrya Siddhānta is said to be explained by the Sun 
god to Maya. 
 

<<<PAGE 83>>>
83 
gods all their jewelry, their most advanced weapons, and their aircraft. 
He even designed the mechanisms by which the planets and stars move 
about in the heavens.  
Mahābhārata speaks often of Viśvakarmā. Sabhā.8.34 states that 
Viśvakarmā designed and built the palace of Yama, god of Bharaṇī.  
Sabhā.9.2 says that he designed and built the underwater palace of 
Varuṇa, god of Śatabhiṣaj. Sabhā.11.31 says that the universal creator 
Brahmā, god of Rohiṇī, keeps Viśvakarmā nearby at all times, calling 
upon his skill frequently. 
Viśvakarmā’s amazing technology includes airships, which some 
interpret as “spaceships.” The Ramāyaṇa and Mahābhārata 
(Vana.161.37) state that he made his most famous airship out of flowers 
and gave it to Brahmā as a gift.21  
Flying Cities 
The Mastya and Śiva Purāṇas say that Maya created three flying cities 
for the anti-gods. The first was made of iron and hovered just above the 
surface of the earth. The second was made of silver and flew in the air. 
The third was made of gold and soared in space, above the clouds. The 
three cities moved in such a way that they would align in a straight line 
only once every thousand years; and only at this time could a single 
missile be shot through all of them. The cities had no other vulnerability. 
The anti-gods and their compatriots flourished and prospered in this 
unassailable triple city and thus the balance of power in the world was 
upset. To counteract this Viśvakarmā (Tvaṣṭā amongst the gods) created 
a flying battleship and a deadly missile using the powers and weapons 
                                                          
21 Brahmā gave it in turn to Kuvera, the God of Wealth. Later, it was stolen from 
Kuvera by the powerful demon, Rāvaṇa, along with the golden city of Lanka 
(which was also designed by Viśvakarmā). 

<<<PAGE 84>>>
84 
of the gods as building materials. From this battleship, Śiva successfully 
destroyed the three flying cities.22 
The Ultimate Weapon: “God’s Thunderbolt” 
Here is another story involving both forms of Tvaṣṭā, Maya and 
Viśvakarmā, showing their mastery of technology and design. The story, 
from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (6.7-12), began in the chapter on Puṣya, 
where we heard how Indra insulted Bṛhaspati and was abandoned by 
him.  
Without his priest, Indra could not gain power by performing rituals, so 
the demons took over paradise. Brahmā advised Indra to go to Maya’s 
son, a three-headed entity named Viśvarūpa, and request him to 
become the priest of the Gods. 
Viśvarūpa reluctantly accepted the request and taught Indra how to 
wear the “Nārāyaṇa Kavaca” – a mystical coat of armor composed of 
mantra (incantations) dedicated to Viṣṇu. With this protection, Indra 
could drive the anti-gods out from paradise. 
Viśvarūpa, however, secretly sent a portion of the ritual offerings to 
empower his relatives among anti-gods. When Indra discovered this, he 
furiously decapitated Viśvarūpa’s three heads.  
Hearing the fate of his son, Maya became enraged and created an 
extremely terrible and gigantic monster called Vṛtra. Powerful Vṛtra 
stormed into paradise and swallowed all the weapons cast at him by the 
gods. Completely hopeless and on the verge of disaster, the gods 
beseeched Viṣṇu’s aid.  
Viṣṇu told them that the spiritual armor Indra received from Viśvarūpa 
had been learned from his father, Maya, who got it from the Aśvinī 
twins, who learned it from a sage named Dadhīci.23 Dadhīci’s body 
                                                          
22 Mahābhārata Karṇa.34.16 specifies that the ship was designed and built by 
Viśvakarmā.  
23 For the fuller story, see the chapter on Aśvinī. 

<<<PAGE 85>>>
85 
possessed extreme power as a result of mastering the use of this 
spiritual armor. Viṣṇu told them to ask Dadhīci to give them his body, 
and then ask Viśvakarmā to create a special “thunderbolt” weapon from 
the crushed bones of Dadhīci. This weapon, Viṣṇu said, could destroy 
the huge and otherwise indestructible Vṛtra. 
Dadhīci gave his body in charity, happy to follow the will of Viṣṇu and 
become liberated from this world. Viśvakarmā then created a unique 
thunderbolt weapon from Dadhīci’s bones. Indra and his powerful 
armies rode out to a terrible and devastating war with the hosts of anti-
gods. In the end Vṛtra, being an enlightened soul, allowed Indra to kill 
him with the special thunderbolt and attained liberation.24 
Replica Worlds 
Tvaṣṭā can even create replicas of other lands and worlds! 
Brahmā Purāṇa says that a sage named Ātreya once requested 
Viśvakarmā to build him a duplicate version of the god’s paradise and 
Viśvakarmā did so. 
Bṛhāt Bhāgavatāmṛta by Sanātana Gosvāmī (a relatively recent work) 
says that Viśvakarmā even created a replica of the spiritual paradise, 
Vṛṇdāvana – the abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He built it near Kṛṣṇa’s city, Dvārakā, 
so that Kṛṣṇa could use it to ease the pain of separation from his 
beloved childhood home. 
The Ultimate Palace 
Mahābhārata (Ādi.226) tells the story of how Maya came to build the 
ultimate royal home: 
Agñi, the god of fire, once got indigestion from consuming too many 
ritual offerings. Brahmā told him that the herbs, roots and creatures of a 
forest named Khandava would cure his ailment. But every time Agñi 
                                                          
24 In the seminal Vedic version of this story, Vṛtra represents storms and 
darkness and Indra uses a thunderbolt to bring light into the darkness and 
cause the clouds to bring forth nourishing rains. 

<<<PAGE 86>>>
86 
tried to consume the forest in flames, torrential downpours put out the 
fire. The forest was protected by Indra, god of rains and the chief of 
heaven, because several important allies of his lived within it.  
Unable to defeat Indra’s rains, Agñi went to Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, who had 
recently built a prosperous city on the outskirts of the forest, and 
requested their help. He offered them gifts of divine weapons and 
appealed to their desire to rid the world of evil (hosts of ferocious 
demons and monsters flourished in the forest). Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa agreed 
to help Agñi.  
Agñi began to consume the forest and Arjuna made an umbrella of 
arrows above it, blocking Indra’s rain.  
Furious, Indra came with all the major gods to fight Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. 
The demons of the forest joined forces with them. Maya was involved, 
and hurled huge slabs of mountainside at Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. But the not 
even the combined forces of gods and anti-gods could overcome Kṛṣṇa 
and Arjuna. Thus Angi successfully consumed the forest.  
During the battle Maya surrendered to the protection of Arjuna and 
became an ally. In gratitude for Arjuna accepting his surrender he 
constructed a palace for Arjuna and the Pāṇḍavas that combined the 
best art, magic and technology of heaven, earth, and the underworld.  
Peaceful forest groves flowered within the palace, and their fragrance 
spread on well-designed breezes (air conditioning). The centerpiece of 
the hall was a lake with living flowers made of gems and a surface that 
blended so seamlessly with the marble shoreline that many visitors to 
the palace unwittingly fell into the pool, being unable to tell the 
difference between the floor and the water. 
Citrā is the star of detailed blueprints, refined skill, multiple 
talents and an ability to comprehend and give shape to many 
angles of a single subject. Through Citrā, Tvaṣṭā empowers 
humanity to create wondrous things that require keen artistic 
sense, detailed expertise and nearly magical technological skills.  

<<<PAGE 87>>>
87 
Individuality ~ Svāti 
 
Name
Svāti  
Meaning
Self-actuation
Symbol
A new bud bending in the wind
Deity
Vāyu - god of air
Main Star
Arcturus
 

<<<PAGE 88>>>
88 
The main component of the word svāti is sva, which means one’s own. 
The meaning of the name Svāti, therefore, has to do with becoming an 
individual.25  
Svāti’s symbol is a new flower bud bending against the strong wind. This 
is a symbol of “going against the grain” and making the effort to stand 
out on our own as an individual.  
The deity of Svāti is Vāyu, god of the wind that blows upon the new bud, 
making it strong. We will discover that Vāyu is the god of Prāṇa, which 
creates individuality in material beings. 
“Individuality” is the key word for Svāti. 
Power 
Since Vāyu is the god of the mighty wind, he is extremely powerful. He 
once held a contest of strength with the Nāga king, Vāsuki. Vāyu 
couldn’t remove Vāsuki from his grip on a mountain, but neither could 
Vāsuki escape from Vāyu’s grip. Viṣṇu finally called a halt to the 
exhausting stalemate. When Vāsuki unwound from the mountain Vāyu 
ripped the peak from its roots and threw it far to the south. It landed in 
the ocean and became the isle of Lanka. 
Vāyu is also the father of the mighty warriors Hanuman and Bhīma. 
The Breath of Life 
Though Vāyu is powerful, he is no brute of hurricanes and storms. He is 
not the god of wind so much as the god of air and of breath. Ṛg Veda 
(10.9) says that Vāyu is the breath of Godhead. 
In modern terms, Vāyu is the god of oxygen. Ṛg Veda (1.7.112) says that 
Vāyu is the father of Agñi. This is because fire (Agñi) cannot burn 
without oxygen (Vāyu). 
                                                          
25 The word svāti also means sword, because a sword is a blade, and blades cut 
things to destroy homogeneity and create individualized divisions. 

<<<PAGE 89>>>
89 
Bṛhadaranyaka Upanishad illustrates that nothing is more essential to 
life than Vāyu / oxygen: 
The gods of the human body held a contest to see who among them 
was the most important. Selecting a man to serve as the arena for their 
contest, one by one the different deities left that man’s body. When the 
god of vision left, the man became blind and morose. Similarly when 
other deities abandoned him the man lost important functions. But 
when Vāyu stood up to leave the man, every deity of the body became 
uprooted and forced to leave, too. Vāyu sat back down and everyone 
returned to normal. Everyone admitted that nothing is more important 
to an individual’s existence than Vāyu: god of breath.  
Our existence as an individual rests upon Vāyu’s power: “life air” (prāṇa 
or, perhaps, oxygen in modern terms). Here are several quotes 
illustrating this. 
Katha Upanishad (1.3.1) says:  
“The individual soul floats on the life-air in the core of the 
individual.” 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (4.29.71) says:  
“Without life-air we lose our sense of ‘I.’ This temporarily 
happens in deep sleep, unconsciousness, or in terrible shock 
such as extremely high fever and during death.” 
Mundaka Upanishad 3.1.9 says:  
“The wise perceive the individual soul floating on five life-airs. 
The true individual does not manifest until it is purified of 
contact with those airs.” 
Indian thought holds the life-air to be a bridge element between matter 
and spirit. It is a type of rope which ties the conscious spirit to an 
individual body and identity, creating an ego divorced and separated 
from the divine whole. 

<<<PAGE 90>>>
90 
The intimate relationship between breath and ego is why a significant 
portion of classical yoga is devoted to breathing techniques. It also 
supports the concept that natal birth chart should be created for the 
moment of a child’s first breath. It is the moment of the child’s first 
contact with Vāyu that is the foundation of their individuality and 
individual destiny.26 
The quote from Mundaka Upanishad suggests that there is another 
individuality which is “purified.” When the soul exists without the life-
air it experiences an identity that is not separated from the divine whole.  
Yet another book, the Chandogya Upanishad, states that spiritual 
realization is impossible until one conceives of the individualizing life-
airs in a spiritual manner, integrated with the divine whole:  
“One cannot know Brahman without knowing Vāyu as ‘om.’”  
Svāti is “ego.” It is the ability to establish a definition of “I.” 
Without Svāti we are unable to clearly individualize ourselves. 
The ultimate potential of Svāti is self-realization: it empowers 
humans to develop an ego that is integrated into the divine 
whole. 
Vāyu and the Silk-Cotton Tree 
Mahābhārata (Śānti.154-156) tells a story involving Vāyu and 
reminiscent of Svāti’s symbol, illustrating the pride of false-ego and 
inflated individuality: 
There was once a silk-cotton tree so huge that its branches would not 
move in any storm, nor would even a single leaf or flower fall. A great 
sage, Nārada, took shelter of this tree during a storm and, amazed, 
praised the tree’s power. The tree became very proud and came to 
consider itself more powerful than Vāyu. 
                                                          
26 It can therefore be inferred that prior to the first breath the child has not 
established the fundaments of a bond to his or her new body and is still largely 
immersed in a trans-lifetime state of awareness. 

<<<PAGE 91>>>
91 
Hearing of this, Vāyu came and said, “You fool! If you are strong, fight 
me here and now!” Vāyu blew off all the tree’s fruits, flowers and leaves. 
He then explained to the humiliated tree, “Long ago, Brahmā rested in 
your shade. Out of deference to the sacred place I have always stilled 
my winds near you. It is not your power that made you great, it was my 
grace!” 
Svāti empowers the self to be an individual, but the risk of 
individualism is egoism. So we must always remember that the 
powers and qualities that make us a unique individual are 
granted to us by the powers of the universe. We should not 
proudly think of ourselves as completely individual and 
disconnected from the divine whole. 

<<<PAGE 92>>>
92 
Obsession ~ Viśākhā  
 
Name
Viśākhā  
Meaning
One-pointed
Symbol
Finish line
Deity
Indrāgñi - god of sacrificial fire
Main Stars
α, β, γ and ι Librae
 

<<<PAGE 93>>>
93 
The root of the word Viśākhā is śākha, which means branch, division, or 
fork. The prefix vi indicates something that is: apart from, distinct, 
intense, and opposite. 
A branch or fork represents a decision. So śākha means a decision. 
Adding the prefix vi- indicates being intensely and distinctly decisive, not 
at all straying here and there on many different forks in the road. I 
translate viśākhā as “One-pointed.” 
Sanskrit Lexicographers state that viśākhā is a term for an archer’s ideal 
attitude in shooting a bow. He selects a target, aims carefully, and does 
not waver in the least.  
The most famous archer of Indian lore is Arjuna. It is said that when he 
would aim his arrow he would not even see anything except the exact 
spot at which he was aiming. This nicely illustrates the decisive focus 
Viśākhā can impart to us. 
The symbol of Viśākhā is a finish line, a target, a goal. I think the 
appropriateness is obvious.  
Viśākhā grants the ability to stay on course and make it as 
straight as possible to the finish line, the goal of the journey. 
There is a famous verse in Bhagavad-Gita (2.41) using the word 
(vi)śākha and illustrating a spiritual application of being “one-pointed”:   
vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana 
bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca buddhayo ‘vyavasāyinām 
“[Spiritualists] have unwavering and one-pointed determination, O 
Son of Kuru; not the unlimited indecisiveness of many-branched 
ambition.” 
The nature of Viśākhā is fixation and decisive dedication. 

<<<PAGE 94>>>
94 
The Power to Get Things Done 
Viśākhā’s deity is Indrāgñi. Some people suggest that Indrāgñi refers to 
two different gods: Indra and Agñi taken together. However, 
Mahābhārata and Ṛg Veda treat Indrāgñi as a single deity.  
For example, Ṛg Veda (3.12) is a prayer to Indrāgñi. Mahābhārata 
(Sabha.11) mentions Indrāgñi in the course of describing all the 
supernatural beings that attend Brahmā. Two forms of fire attend the 
Creator: Agñisoma and Indrāgñi. These are the two forms of fire 
required for religious rituals. Agñisoma is at Brahmā’s service so that the 
Creator can have health and vitality (the principles of Soma) to live as 
long as the creation. Indrāgñi is at Brahmā’s service so that he can 
obtain divine intelligence and power by worshipping Viṣṇu.27 
As you can see, there are many different types of fire (agñi). The 
foremost (indra) is the fire used in sacrifices and rituals. Thus, Indrāgñi is 
the god of ritual fire. 
We must put ourselves in a Vedic mindset before we can really 
understand what the god of ritual fire has to do with Viśākhā, the star of 
singular and decisive dedication to a goal. In Vedic culture, rituals are 
not irrelevant rites or obscure religious observances. They are the means 
to obtain what you desire! Whatever you desire, there is a Vedic ritual 
that grants you the merit to have your desire fulfilled by providence. 
Viśākhā is all about decisive commitment to an objective, and Indrāgñi is 
the god that enables us to achieve that objective.  
Viśākhā creates strong dedication to objectives and the ability to 
achieve those goals. Viśākhā can give rise to Machiavellian 
ideals, such as “the end justifies the means” or similar 
convictions such as, “by any means necessary.”   
                                                          
27 As per the statement of Bhāgavata Purāṇa (1.1.1): “Brahmā receives 
intelligence from Viṣṇu.” 

<<<PAGE 95>>>
95 
Goddess Viśākhā & Rādhā  
According to the Gauḍiya Vaiṣṇava concept, a goddess named Viśākhā 
attends the primordial fountainhead of all goddesses, Śrī Rādhā. Her 
role is to help goddess Rādhā make decisions and keep her divine 
determination fixed.  
Considering Atharva Veda (19.7), it is quite likely that the original name 
of Viśākhā nakṣatra was “Rādhā.” It forms a pair with the next nakṣatra, 
Anurādhā.  
  

<<<PAGE 96>>>
96 
Devotion ~ Anurādhā 
 
Name
Anurādhā  
Meaning
Devotion
Symbol
A flower on the finish line
Deity
Mitra - god of devotion & friendship
Main Stars
β, δ and π Scorpionis
 

<<<PAGE 97>>>
97 
Anurādhā shares a symbol with the previous star, Viśākhā. This is the 
second time we have come across a pair of stars sharing a symbol. The 
first was Pūrva and Uttara Phālgunī. If we consider that the original 
name of Viśākhā may very likely have been Rādhā, it’s pairing with 
Anurādhā becomes more obvious. 
The prefix anu- means “after, under, near, following, next, and towards.” 
If Viśākhā is originally “Rādhā” then the literal meaning of the name for 
the next star is obvious: Anu-Rādhā, “The star that follows Rādhā.” 
Viśākhā is the star of singular dedication and Anurādhā is very similar, it 
is the star of deep devotion. The word rādhā means, “gifts and favors” 
and is derived from the word arādhāna, “adoration & devotion.” Both 
stars in this pair are similar in their single-minded dedication, but 
Anurādhā differs from Viśākhā in that her single-minded dedication is 
especially motivated by love and devotion. It is therefore fitting that 
Anurādhā’s symbol differs slightly from Viśākhā’s: it is also a finish line, 
but has the addition of a flower – a symbol of love and devotion. 
The deity empowering Anurādhā is Mitra, the Vedic god of devotion and 
friendship. 
Love is the Inspiration 
The first part of Mitra, mi-, means to “bring together.” The second part, 
-tra, means “instrument.” So Mitra is the god that “brings people 
together.” The word Mitra comes to mean “friend” because friendship 
brings people together and binds them to one another. Mitra is the 
“instrument of coming together,” the god of friendship and love. 
We can also derive this word from the root mid- (“to endear”) and the 
suffix -tra, so that mitra means “the vehicle of endearment”, love. 
Ṛg Veda thoroughly praises Mitra. There is one hymn in particular, the 
59th of the 3rd book, that is uniquely directed at Mitra without his usual 
companion Varuṇa: 

<<<PAGE 98>>>
98 
Mitra’s words inspire us to action 
Mitra sustains heaven and earth. 
Mitra looks on us with eyes that never close. 
Let this offering of sacred butter go to Mitra. 
Now read that again substituting “love” for the name Mitra. Love is the 
inspiration to action. Love sustains heaven and earth: all beings, even 
the gods, are sustained by love. The glance of a lover upon the beloved 
curses its own blinking, which removes the beloved from sight for a 
moment. Such is the glance of Mitra. 
Anurādhā is the star where love acts as the inspiration for all 
actions. It is a star of tenderness, romance, and the need to give 
and receive affection. 
Love is the Law 
The same section of Ṛg Vedas continues and says, “O Mitra, we strive to 
live by your principles.” 
This indicates that Vedic people strove to live by the principles of love, 
and they made their laws on that basis, considering love to be the 
essence of all rules and laws. In fact, “the instrument that brings 
together” (mitra) is “that which binds.” Agreements, laws and promises 
are therefore a form of love. Thus Mitra, the god of affection and love, 
is also the god of principles and contracts. 
Anurādhā abides by agreements, promises, and laws, as a result 
of affection and love for what those principles represent.  
Glory of Love 
I’ll continue to tell you key sections of this hymn to Mitra. Whenever 
you read the word “Mitra” remember the word “love.” 
Mitra is adorable and auspicious 
From the very beginning. 
He is gracious, generous and kind.  

<<<PAGE 99>>>
99 
Mitra is most deserving of praise. 
Mitra’s grace brings true gains. 
Inspiring us to achieve true glory. 
Mitra’s glory is well-known. 
It overpowers heaven. 
It surpasses the ends of the earth. 
Regardless of race, 
Everyone seeks Mitra’s shelter 
Which is always strong 
And sustains even the gods. 
Mitra nourishes everyone 
Gods, men, priests alike. 
He is the fulfillment of sacred law. 
Love and Lust  
Mitra forms a pair with Varuṇa. We will learn about Varuṇa in detail 
when we come to his star – Śatabhiṣa. For now, suffice to say that 
Varuṇa is the god of the underworld, and therefore represents the 
“lower polarity.” Mitra is a solar deity, the “higher polarity.” One 
example of this polarity is seeing Mitra as the daytime and Varuṇa as 
the night. There is another example that is much more relevant to 
Anurādhā.  
Love has two polarities: love (selfless) and lust (selfish). In Sanskrit, 
prema is selfless love, and kāma is selfish love, lust. Mitra is love - 
meant to bring joy to others and bind us to others. Varuṇa is lust - 
meant to bring joy to oneself and to bind others to us. 
Anurādhā is Mitra’s star of devotional dedication. It is impossible to 
totally separate selfless and selfish love, but the true aim and impetus 
of Anurādhā is towards prema, selfless love. 
The following amazing story from Uttara Rāma Carita (and referred to in 
Mahābhārata Śānti.88.343) illustrates this: 

<<<PAGE 100>>>
100 
Mitra-Varuṇa had kept themselves in a single body and were wandering 
on the seashore when they happened to meet Urvaśī, the most 
delightful and attractive damsel of paradise. They made love, and Urvaśī 
conceived. 
Mitra-Varuṇa then separated into distinct bodies, in disagreement of 
how to proceed. Varuṇa again propositioned Urvaśī for sex, but she 
disliked his greed for it and rejected him in favor of Mitra. Varuṇa, 
however, couldn’t contain his excitement and ejaculated involuntarily.  
This made Urvaśī feel sorry for rejecting a man in such need. She 
therefore collected the semen and put it into an artificial womb. She 
also discharged her newly fertilized egg and put that into the artificial 
womb as well. In a few days two children emerged: the great sages 
Agastya and Vaisiṣṭha. 
Rādhārāṇī 
Viśākhā and Anurādhā nakṣatra were known as “The two Rādhā’s” in 
Vedic times. It is impossible to write about these stars without at least 
referencing the Supreme Goddess of late-classical Vaiṣṇavism: Rādhā, 
honorifically addressed as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 
The dedication of Śrī Rādhā for her beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the pinnacle of 
the Mitra-Varuṇa polarity where prema completely transforms kāma; 
and is the highest realization of Mitra’s essential principle: love as the 
supreme law. 
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu composed a verse beautifully expressing the 
infinitely selfless love of Śrī Rādhā for Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām 
adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā 
yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo 
mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ  

<<<PAGE 101>>>
101 
Maybe he will embrace me, 
Maybe he will trample me underfoot, 
Or perhaps he will simply break my heart by not showing up at 
all… 
That Libertine can do anything he likes, 
But he will always be the only lord of my life’s breath! 
 

<<<PAGE 102>>>
102 
Eminence ~ Jyeṣṭhā  
 
Name
Jyeṣṭhā   
Meaning
Foremost
Symbol
Earring, umbrella or amulet
Deity
Indra – Chief of the gods
Main Stars
Antares and the stars closeby
 

<<<PAGE 103>>>
103 
The word jyeṣṭhā means, “chief, best, greatest, first, eldest.” Indra is the 
deity of Jyeṣṭhā, and the words indra and jyeṣṭhā are synonyms. Both 
mean “eldest” in the sense of being first and foremost. Indra is “Jyeṣṭhā” 
- He is the firstborn of the gods. 
The title “Indra” is also given to the Supreme Godhead Viṣṇu, for it 
generically means “the best, the first, the eldest.” Generally, however, 
as a proper noun it refers to a god who is the king of paradise. 
Vedic literature has three main branches, each of which encapsulates a 
specific aspect of Indian culture. The Veda themselves represent 
ritualistic, materialistic culture. The Upanishads represent scientific and 
philosophical culture. The Puranas represent devotional culture. Indra is 
of prime importance – the God of Gods – in the Vedas, but his position is 
diminished significantly in the Upanishads and Puranas. This is because 
of what Indra inherently is. He is the king of paradise, the ultimate 
trademark of a living being enjoying life to its fullest extent. Thus his 
divinity is of unsurpassed significance for the ritualistic materialism 
dominating the Veda. But in the philosophical Upanishads and 
devotional Puranas his light is dimmed tremendously.  
The Ṛg Veda presents Indra as being very handsome and of golden 
complexion. In his hand is a weapon of thunderbolts, made by the 
divine architect Tvaṣṭā. The wind himself, Vāyu, drives Indra’s brilliant 
golden chariot through the heavens (thus Indra is one of the 8 original 
solar-deities, Ādityas, of Ṛg Veda). He constantly drinks Soma and is 
therefore exceedingly powerful and delighted. 
The Purāṇas, however, focus far more on his flaws. This is because the 
Purāṇas downplay what Indra intrinsically represents: the height of self-
oriented enjoyment and prosperity. So throughout the Purāṇa we find 
tale after tale of Indra getting into trouble and making proud mistakes. 
A particularly poignant story in this regard is told in Padma Purāṇa 1.56: 

<<<PAGE 104>>>
104 
Indra fell in love with the beautiful wife of a powerful yogi (Gautama). 
He assumed the form of her husband and came to her saying, “Lust has 
taken hold of me, let’s make love!” 
The yogi knew what was happening so he rushed back to his hermitage. 
When he saw Indra enjoying his wife, he cursed the god, “You seem to 
be so dedicated to vagina that you will do anything, no matter how 
wrong, to enjoy one; here then, let one thousand vaginas cover your 
body, and let your balls fall off!” 
Indra went to bathe in a sacred lake and pray to goddess Lakṣmī for a 
cure.  
She said, “Even I cannot undo the curse of a true yogi and sage! But I 
can modify it to your advantage. In each vagina let there be an eye – so 
you will be covered not with 1000 vaginas but with 1000 eyes! And for 
testicles, I bless you to have those of a ram!”  
Indra throughout the Stars 
Being the king of the gods, Indra’s relevance spans through many stars.  
In Aśvinī’s chapter we read about how Indra wanted to keep certain 
knowledge from getting out, but the Aśvinī twins circumvented him. In 
that chapter we also heard how Indra wanted to prevent the Aśvinī 
from drinking Soma, but the sage Cyavana convinced Indra otherwise. 
In Kṛttikā’s chapter we heard about the birth of Kārtikeya. Prior to the 
beginning of that story, Indra sent Kāmadeva (god of lust) to Śiva to 
incite him to procreate (as you might recall, the Gods needed a child 
from Śiva to defeat the anti-god that was destroying them). Śiva opened 
his third eye and burned Kāmadeva (who since that time has no physical 
body), thus Indra’s attempt was foiled. 
In this chapter we also heard how Agñi and Indra together tested the 
extent of King Śibi’s charitable nature. 

<<<PAGE 105>>>
105 
In Mṛgaśīrṣā’s chapter we learned about Soma, the drink that primarily 
belongs to Indra. 
In Punarvasu’s chapter we learned about Indra’s mother, Aditi. And we 
learned that she had Indra destroy her sister’s unborn child before he 
could become Indra’s rival.  
From this early event Indra developed intolerance rivals. This is 
an important part of Indra’s character, and an important part of 
Indra’s star, Jyeṣṭhā. 
In Puṣya’s chapter we learned about Indra’s high priest, Bṛhaspati. We 
heard how Indra insulted Bṛhaspati and then suffered defeat by the 
anti-gods on account of losing his favor.  
In Citrā’s chapter we learned how Tvaṣṭā eventually saved Indra from 
this predicament, and created Indra’s thunderbolt weapon. In this 
chapter we also heard that Indra was defeated by Arjuna28 and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. 
In Āśleṣā’s chapter we learned about the Nāga. An important Nāga is 
Tākṣaka, who was a friend of Indra, and for whose sake Indra protected 
the Khaṇḍava forest and thus wound up having to battle and be 
defeated by Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa. 
Symbols of Jyeṣṭhā  
The primary symbol of Jyeṣṭhā is an amulet / talisman. Secondarily, an 
earring and umbrella symbolize this nakṣatra. 
The amulet literally is the mystical armor, nārāyaṇa-kavaca, discussed in 
Citrā’s chapter while explaining how Indra managed to defeat Vṛtra. 
As for the earring and umbrella, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (10.59) tells a 
relevant tale: 
                                                          
28 Arjuna is Indra’s own son. His mother is the human, Kuntī. 

<<<PAGE 106>>>
106 
A person going by the name Narakāsura became so powerful that he 
attacked paradise. In an act of defiance and insult he stole Indra’s royal 
umbrella and the earrings of his mother, Aditi. 
Indra sought the help of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who along with his courageous wife 
Satyabhāmā mounted the great eagle, Garuḍa, and flew directly into 
battle. They destroyed Naraka and returned the stolen umbrella and 
earrings to Indra. 
Indra invited them to enjoy his hospitality in paradise. While there, Aditi 
taught many paradisic arts to Satyabhāmā. While leaving she requested 
from Kṛṣṇa a flower from Indra’s most beautiful tree. When Kṛṣṇa took 
this flower without asking, Indra became insulted and had to be 
defeated in a battle with Kṛṣṇa, who took the entire tree in the end! 
Jyeṣṭhā empowers humans to become like Indra: to be best, first, 
foremost, and kingly. It also has flaws similar to the flaws Indra 
possesses: to be intoxicated by power. 
Indra, Kṛṣṇa, and the Umbrella-Mountain 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (10.24-27) tells another story relating to Indra and 
the umbrella symbolism of Jyeṣṭhā. It is the story of Kṛṣṇa’s lifting 
Mount Govardhana to protect his friends and family from Indra’s anger: 
Śrī Kṛṣṇa grew up among cowherders. One day when he was six or 
seven years old, he saw his father and the men of the village busy doing 
something apparently very important. 
“Dad, what is going on?” He asked. 
“Don’t worry, go play with your friends!”  
“You have to educate me!” Kṛṣṇa replied. 
His father smiled, full of affection. Other’s came over to enjoy the 
conversation. “We are preparing for an important sacrifice,” his father 
explained. 

<<<PAGE 107>>>
107 
“For who?” Kṛṣṇa asked. 
“For Indra.” 
“Why?” Kṛṣṇa asked. 
“Because we are farmers and Indra is the god who controls the rain.” 
“Dad, have you ever seen Indra?” Kṛṣṇa asked? 
His father was at a loss for words, so Kṛṣṇa continued, “You say Indra is 
responsible for our well-being, but we don’t even see him. And what’s 
more we see rain falling on the ocean where no one ever worships 
Indra.” 
The men were dumbfounded to hear a young child speak like this. 
“I see cows!” Kṛṣṇa said. “I see rivers. I see grasses, vegetables, trees 
and fruits. I see teachers and philosophers. All these things I can really 
see are the things that are responsible for our well-being! Don’t worship 
Indra, worship them!” 
“But son,” Kṛṣṇa’s father said, “If we neglect the gods we will make 
them angry.” 
“Don’t worry about any of that!” said Kṛṣṇa cheerfully. And he was so 
charming that all the men actually changed their plans and used all the 
ingredients of Indra’s sacrifice to instead worship the animals and 
people in nature that were directly supporting and nourishing them. 
It was an enormously festive occasion, but Indra was wondering where 
his sacrifice was.  He became furious when he observed all the villagers 
listening to a young boy telling them not to bother worshipping Indra. 
He called forth his most powerful storm clouds and sent them to Kṛṣṇa’s 
village, Vṛṇdāvana. 
The villagers became extremely fearful when the terrible storms let 
loose torrential downpours. They rushed to Kṛṣṇa for protection. He 

<<<PAGE 108>>>
108 
lifted the local mountain, Mount Govardhana and held it aloft for seven 
days on the pinky finger of his left hand, creating an umbrella under 
which the entire village was kept dry and safe. 
Realizing Kṛṣṇa to be Viṣṇu himself, Indra stopped the storms and 
hurried to apologize. Because he brought the cow of paradise with him, 
Kṛṣṇa’s heart was softened and he forgave the king of the gods. 
Jyeṣṭhā’s higher nature is to empower human beings to shelter 
and protect others, like Kṛṣṇa did by lifting the umbrella of 
Mount Govardhana, like a king (“Indra”) does for his citizens, 
and like the eldest (“Jyeṣṭhā”) does for his siblings. 
 

<<<PAGE 109>>>
109 
Uprooting ~ Mūla 
 
Name
Mūla    
Meaning
Root
Symbol
Tangled roots
Deity
Nirṛti - goddess of destruction
Main Stars
The tail of the Scorpion
 

<<<PAGE 110>>>
110 
The Sanskrit word mūla means, “Root, bottom, foundation, origin, 
beginning, and primary.” It even refers to a “corpse,” perhaps because 
the body is the root of ego and of our connection to a world that in 
always in a state of destruction. 
Its connection to “roots” is a symbol that reveals Mūla’s 
proclivity towards herbalism, medicines and drugs. It also 
expresses Mūla’s penchant for seeking the origin, beginning, and 
unseen root of things. 
Mūla belongs to the goddess Nirṛti, the goddess of destruction. The 
word nirṛti has two parts nir- and ṛta. Ṛta means, “true, luminous, 
proper, right, lawful.” The prefix, nir-, means, “without.” So, Nirṛti 
means “unlawful, improper, dark, false, and evil.” 
Mūla impels humanity towards lawlessness and an untamed 
spirit. 
Mahābhārata (Adi.66.54) depicts Nirṛti as the wife of Adharma 
(Immorality). They have three sons, Bhaya (Fear), Mahā-Bhaya (Terror), 
and Antaka (Murder). 
Agñi Purāṇa (chapter 51) says that Nirṛti should be worshipped wielding 
a sword and riding on a donkey. Devī Bhāgavata (8th division) says that 
she dwells in a city called “Ink Black” (“Kṛṣṇāñjana”), and is the guardian 
of the South-East, a direction symbolic of pain and suffering.  
Nirṛti the Destroyer has both a male and female form, a “Rudra” and 
“Rudrāṇī.” The chapter on Rudra’s star, Ārdrā, has much to say which is 
pertinent to Ārdrā’s sister-star, Mūla. In particular it’s important to 
recall that the Howling Destroyer (Rudra) becomes the Auspicious One 
(Śiva) after directing his attention to spiritual pursuits. 
Mūla provides impetuses and resources that are very well suited 
for spiritual paths. It therefore inspires humanity towards 
spiritual pursuit: seeking the root of all things, destroying 
illusions, and going beyond the limitations of what is superficial. 

<<<PAGE 111>>>
111 
Transforming Destruction into Auspiciousness 
Atharva Veda (5.7) depicts Nirṛti in two forms: one is horrific and 
ghoulish, while the other is blonde, fair, golden-clad and wealthy:  
Misfortune, go far away! 
We deflect your arrow! 
We know you well, Nirṛti! Oppressor, destroyer! 
A wild, naked woman haunting our dreams, 
Confusing and baffling us 
I respect you, blonde Nirṛti  
Vast as all of space 
Full of auspiciousness, golden-complexioned, 
reclining on gold, dressed in gold, 
I respect you. 
The first form of Nirṛti is unfortunate, baffling and confusing. It is an 
oppressive, destructive, naked undead who haunts our thoughts. The 
second is auspicious, golden, blonde and spread throughout space. 
Mūla is fearsome and destroys us. But when we respect the 
function of destruction as a necessary stage prior to a new 
creation, we receive auspicious and beneficial energy from Mūla. 
When destruction takes place things are flattened and laid low, razed to 
the ground, only the roots remain. Corpses or their ashes are put 
underground, or into water so that they soak into the earth. Destruction 
(Nirṛti) is intimately tied to what is low and deep (Mūla). 
The goddess of destruction works through Mūla. Few people seek 
destruction, but it is nonetheless an essential part of the balance of 
nature. It would be good to review the chapters on Bharaṇī (star of the 
god of death) and Ārdrā (star of the god of destruction and storms) to 
remember how negative things are essential to positive things. 

<<<PAGE 112>>>
112 
Through Mūla we can destroy all that deserves destruction. We 
can seek our true origin, our true root, and destroy all that is 
superficial. 

<<<PAGE 113>>>
113 
The Invincible ~ Pūrva Aṣāḍhā 
 
Name
Pūrva Aṣāḍhā
Meaning
Invincible (I)
Symbol
Elephant tusk, fan
Deity
Āpas - goddess of water
Main Stars
δ and ε Sagittarii
 

<<<PAGE 114>>>
114 
The Aṣāḍhā stars are the third of the four nakṣatra pairs in the Vedic sky. 
Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is, of course, the first star in this pair: which is composed 
two groups of parallel stars that reminded the Vedic people of two 
elephant tusks. 
Aṣāḍhā means, invincible. Elephant tusks are certainly invincible. They 
smash through anything that stands in their way, but Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is 
not like a bulldozer. Another symbol for it is a fan – something that 
keeps us cool and calm. Continuing the theme of being cool, calm and 
refreshed, the deity of Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is the goddess of water: “Āpas.”  
There is a close relation between Āpas and the following gods: 
• 
Varuṇa, god of the waters. Āpas is Varuṇa’s wife. 
• 
Soma, the ultimate liquid; ambrosia of the gods which grants 
unsurpassed health and enjoyment. 
• 
Indra, god of rains.  
• 
Agñi, god of fire, since fire “enters into” water to rest and 
recuperate.29 
Ṛg Veda (7.49) is a prayer to Āpas which makes these connections quite 
clear: 
From the sea comes the waters (Āpas) of the flowing rivers; 
Never sleeping, always cleansing. 
Their paths dug by Indra, the thunderous bull. 
Goddesses, protect me! 
Waters from heaven 
Waters from earth 
Waters from below the surface 
Bright, purifying, speeding towards the ocean. 
Goddesses, protect me! 
                                                          
29 H2O seperates into Hydrogen and Oxygen which are both highly flammable. 

<<<PAGE 115>>>
115 
Within you goes mighty Varuṇa 
Who tells morality from immorality. 
From you comes Soma – bright and purifying. 
Goddesses, protect me! 
From you mighty Varuṇa, Soma, and all gods drink 
and gain strength and vigor. 
Into you goes fire (Agñi). 
Goddesses, protect me! 
Thus, Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is thematically harmonious with: 
• 
Śatabhiṣaj, Varuṇa’s star 
• 
Mṛgaśīrṣā, Soma’s star 
• 
Jyeṣṭhā, Indra’s star 
• 
Kṛttikā, Agñi’s star 
The word Āpas refers directly to water itself. The goddess of water can 
be more personally addressed as Vāruṇī. Padma Purāṇa (Bhūmi.119) 
says that when the gods and anti-gods churned the ocean of milk, by 
Varuṇa’s efforts four goddesses appeared from the ocean: Sulakṣmī, 
Vāruṇī, Kāmodā and Śreṣṭhā.  Vāruṇī married Varuṇa and became the 
goddess of water, Āpas. 
Purifying, Nourishing and Delicious 
Ṛg Veda (7.47) describes water (Āpas): 
O Āpas, grant us today the purest refreshment 
Found in the sacred beverage of the king of gods 
Richly sweet, and soundly nourishing. 
O Āpas, child of floods, whose course is rapid, 
Protect us with a wave of that delicious drink 
Which makes the king of the gods and all the gods joyful. 
Grant us this today. 

<<<PAGE 116>>>
116 
[This treats water as being nearly identical to Soma, the divine beverage, 
and being therefore very dear to Indra, the king of the gods.] 
O Āpas, the rivers joyfully purify us 
They are goddesses, paths flowing to the gods. 
Always obeying divine law, 
We offer our buttered-sacrifice to the rivers. 
Sūrya’s bright rays attract them, 
Indra digs the paths they travel 
Let these streams give us wide fields and freedom to move. 
By your blessing, O gods, let it be. 
Strength, Health and Fertility 
Ṛg Veda (10.9) describes Āpas: 
O Waters (Āpas) you are beneficent 
So bring us energy, to find happiness 
Give us your most auspicious liquid 
Like a loving mother 
We gladly come to you, to carry us swiftly forward 
And give us fertility 
O Waters, be our drink; Goddesses to aid and delight us 
Send us a river of strength and health30 
I beg your protection, O Waters 
Goddesses of precious things, who control us all  
Soma says that all healing comes from water 
So also says Agñi, who blesses everyone 
O Waters, may your abundant healing keep me healthy 
So I may long see the sunlight 
                                                          
30 This line is the mantra recommended in Parashara Hora Shastra as a remedial 
meditation for Saturn! 

<<<PAGE 117>>>
117 
Whatever sin is in me, whatever evil I have done, 
Whatever lies I have made… O Waters, take it far from me! 
O Waters, with this prayer I seek the blessing of your moisture 
Send forth Agñi to nourish and bath me in light 
The Nature of Pūrva Aṣāḍhā  
We know that Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is about strength and victory because 
Aṣāḍhā means invincible and the invincible elephant tusk is one of this 
star’s symbols. But from the symbol of a fan and the nature of Pūrva 
Aṣāḍhā’s deity, Water, we learn Pūrva Aṣāḍhā imparts invincibility like 
water – strong enough to destroy stone, yet still soft and cool. 
Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is a star of strength through purity. It confers 
strength and power to mankind, but in a pleasant manner, like 
the invincible yet appealing power of water. Being both 
appealing and powerful, Pūrva Aṣāḍhā creates leaders with 
significant popularity and mass appeal. As Āpas brings together 
the powers of many gods, Varuṇa, Indra, Soma and Agñi so does 
Pūrva Aṣāḍhā create people who call pool together a wide range 
of skills and resources to become successful – though this last 
trait is even more prominent in the next star, Uttara Aṣāḍhā. 

<<<PAGE 118>>>
118 
Complete Victory ~ Uttara Aṣāḍhā  
 
Name
Uttara Aṣāḍhā
Meaning
Invincible (II)
Symbol
Elephant tusk, fan
Deity
Viśvedeva - all supernatural powers
Main Stars
ζ and σ Sagittarii
 

<<<PAGE 119>>>
119 
Uttara Aṣāḍhā is the second in the Aṣāḍhā pair; the second “elephant 
tusk.” As with all the paired stars, the second shares all the main themes 
of the first, with some subtle yet important differences. Uttara Aṣāḍhā 
is like Pūrva Aṣāḍhā in granting power to humanity, but it differs from 
the former by being less self-oriented and more inclined to consolidate 
power and resources from many diverse supporters. This is because the 
deity of Uttara Aṣāḍhā is not a singular being but a complete plurality of 
all the gods and goddesses. 
The invincibility of this second Aṣāḍhā comes from the ability to 
pull together many divergent resources and make them work for 
a common purpose. 
Both Aṣāḍhā stars are invincible and undefeatable – but Uttara Aṣāḍhā 
lacks the soft, watery element which made Pūrva Aṣāḍhā’s power more 
appealing. Thus Uttara Aṣāḍhā appears more literally undefeatable and 
unchallengeable, much like an elephant storming through a gate. 
All Inclusive Divinity 
Viśva literally means, “all, every.” Deva means “divinity.” The 
fundamental meaning of the word Viśvadeva is, “every divinity.” 
The Ṛg Veda adopts this meaning and has many prayers directed to all 
the gods, on the principle that no divinity should be left out from praise. 
As Viśvadeva, all the gods cooperate together under a central deity, 
usually Indra (see Ṛg 3.54.17). 
Viṣṇu Purāṇa and other Purāṇas do not ignore this meaning, but give an 
additional definition of the Viśvadeva as one of nine special groupings of 
divinity. There are usually 10, sometimes 12, deities counted in this 
group, all of whom are said to be children of Viśvā, one of the daughters 
of the universe’s genetic engineer, Dakṣa. These deities control the 
various powers required to be a well-rounded and successful individual. 
From either angle, the Viśvadeva empower humanity to draw 
upon a large pool of resources, and become successful as a 

<<<PAGE 120>>>
120 
result of being endowed with qualities and skills from diverse 
sources. 
Another effect of drawing power from all sources: 
Uttara Aṣāḍhā empowers human beings to give “110%” to their 
tasks, drawing all available power and pouring it into each of 
their endeavors. 

<<<PAGE 121>>>
121 
Listening Carefully ~ Śravaṇa 
 
Name
Śravaṇa
Meaning
Listening
Symbol
Ear, three footprints
Deity
Viṣṇu - god of existence
Main Stars
Altair and the two nearest stars
 

<<<PAGE 122>>>
122 
Śravaṇa means “the act of acquiring knowledge.” It comes from the 
root śru (“to hear”). We acquire knowledge, literally and figuratively, by 
listening - so Śravaṇa means “acquiring knowledge by listening.” An ear 
is a very straightforward symbol for this star. 
Through Śravaṇa humanity becomes good listeners, speakers 
and audio-smiths. 
We have heard a lot about Viṣṇu throughout this book.  
• 
In the chapter on Bharaṇī we learned how Viṣṇu rescued a 
person whom he heard calling his name, “Nārāyaṇa.”   
• 
In the chapter on Rohiṇī we learned about Viṣṇu in relation to 
his “child,” Brahmā. I heartily suggest rereading that section to 
refresh yourself on its important details pertaining to Viṣṇu. 
• 
In the chapter on Punarvasu we heard how Viṣṇu covered all of 
existence in three steps. (Another symbol for Śravaṇa is three 
footsteps.) 
• 
In Āśleṣā’s chapter we heard about Viṣṇu in relation to his 
companion, the dragon Śeṣa.  
• 
In Pūrva Phālgunī’s chapter we heard that Viṣṇu is “Bhagavān” 
in the fullest sense.  
Viṣṇu is the origin of existence itself. The word viṣṇu means “that which 
is everywhere.” Space is everywhere. It is what everything is inside of, 
and what everything has within it. The sensory wavelength carried by 
space (according to the science of Saṁkhya) is sound. Sound is what the 
ear hears. Thus all-pervading Viṣṇu is a perfect fit for Śravaṇa, the star 
of listening. 
Viṣṇu is also the god that enables us to listen carefully. To listen 
carefully we need a pensive and clear state of mind. As we learned in 
the chapter on Rohiṇī, this world has three primary effects on us: 

<<<PAGE 123>>>
123 
sometimes it excites us to action (rajas), sometimes it lulls us to sleep 
(tamas) and sometimes it allows us to be balanced and clear (sattva). 
Brahmā is the god of rajas. Rudra / Śiva is the god of tamas. Viṣṇu is the 
god of sattva – clarity. So Viṣṇu enables our minds to be clear and 
pensive so we can listen carefully and gain knowledge. 
Śravaṇa is a star of paying attention and acquiring knowledge. It 
is an excellent star for education and intelligence, empowering 
us to ask intelligent questions, listen carefully to answers, and 
seek qualified teachers. 
Viṣṇu is a very transcendental, non-materialistic god. Thus Śravaṇa is 
particularly well suited to helping humanity acquire spiritual knowledge. 
A famous verse in the Bhāgavata Purāṇa (7.5.23) explains that the nine 
processes for obtaining enlightenment all begin with and are rooted in 
“Viṣṇu Śravaṇa” – hearing from and about Viṣṇu. 
Through Śravaṇa Viṣṇu inspires human beings to seek deeper 
knowledge, spiritual truths, enlightenment and divine love. 
Viṣṇu in Ṛg Veda 
Viṣṇu is frequently invoked in Ṛg Veda (in 93 different places). He is 
mainly known there as the younger brother of Indra who reclaimed the 
universe for Indra in three steps.  
It is undeniable that Ṛg Veda, being a comparatively materialistic and 
practical text, focuses primarily on Indra.31 But Viṣṇu is uniquely 
attributed in a few notable instances. For example Ṛg 1.22.20: 
tad viṣṇoḥ paramam padam sadā paśyanti sūryaḥ 
“The gods always look towards the supreme feet of Viṣṇu.” 
                                                          
31 See the chapter on Indra’s star, Jyeṣṭhā, for a more detailed discussion on 
this point. 

<<<PAGE 124>>>
124 
Ṛg (1.154.4) also states, “In truth, Viṣṇu alone maintains the existence 
of all things.” 
Ṛg (1.156.2) says, “Viṣṇu is the ancient and the recent, the creator of 
existence and the creator of his own existence.” 
Viṣṇu’s Incarnations 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (1.3) gives the following account of Viṣṇu’s 
incarnations in this world: 
At the very beginning, the All-Attractive takes the form called Puruṣa [a 
synonym for Viṣṇu], to manifest everything required for creation. He 
produces great conglomerations of primordial energies and enters each, 
reclines upon the water there, and enters a mystic sleep. A lotus flower 
grows from the lake of his naval, atop which Brahmā, the master 
engineer of the universe, is born. 
Then Puruṣa enters every minute particle of the universe, becoming the 
inexhaustible seed of the multitudes of incarnations, fragments of which 
create gods, animals, humans and so forth. 
His most noteworthy incarnations, in summary, are: 
1. The children [Kumāra] performed the difficult spiritual task of 
uninterrupted celibacy. 
2. The boar [Varāha] rescued the earth from the lowest dregs of 
the universe and lifted her back into her proper place. 
3. The Sage of the Gods [Nārada] compiled purifying books about 
how to live in the world without becoming entangled in 
selfishness. 
4. The sages Nara-Nārāyaṇa were born from Dharma’s wife. They 
showed how to perform very serious disciplines of self-control. 
5. When empirical sciences were forgotten, the master of 
perfections, Kapila, revived them by teaching Āsuri. 

<<<PAGE 125>>>
125 
6. Atri’s wife Anasūyā once prayed for a divine son. That son 
[Dattātreya] instructed spiritual knowledge to Alarka, Prahlāda 
and others. 
7. Yajña, born from Ākūti and Ruci, took care of the world during 
the difficult transition out of the Svāyambhu Era.32 
8. Urukrama, born from Merudevī and Nābhi, showed the path 
walked by supremely enlightened souls. 
9. As an earthly king [Pṛthu], he answered the prayers of sages by 
milking the earth to make her body very verdant and attractive. 
10. During the global flood of the “Cākṣuṣa” era, he became a fish 
[Matsya] and protected the lord of humans by keeping him safe 
on a boat. 
11. In the form of a tortoise [Kurma] his shell provided the 
foundation for Mt. Mandara when the gods and demons were 
churning the ocean. 
12. Dhānvantari was the twelfth, [who produced the nectar], and...  
13. Mohinī was an intoxicatingly beautiful woman who gave that 
nectar to the gods while charming the others with her allure.  
14. Nārasiṁha was the man-lion whose claws split open the 
powerful demon-god, like a carpenter splitting wood. 
15. Vāmana went to Bali’s ritual court and peacefully begged three 
steps of land, for the sake of reclaiming the three worlds. 
16. When kings began to hate moral guidance, Paraśurāma 
protected the earth by annihilating all their militias, twenty one 
times. 
                                                          
32 The difficulty occurred because there was no one suitable to fill the post of 
Indra, the king of heaven. So Viṣṇu incarnated as Yajña to personally take the 
post. 

<<<PAGE 126>>>
126 
17. Vyāsa entered the womb of Satyavatī through Parāśara, to 
present the many branches of the tree of knowledge in a way 
which less intellectual commoners could grasp. 
18. Rāma assumed the role of a human king and, for the sake of the 
gods, performed many heroic deeds like controlling the ocean. 
19. Bala-Rāma… 
20. …and Kṛṣṇa, were born in the Vṛṣṇi family. The All-Attractive 
thus removed the earth’s burden. 
21. When the age of Kali advances, he will bewilder those who 
dislike the godly. He will be named Buddha, the son of Añjanā of 
Gayā. 
22. When the age of Kali draws to a close and almost all the rulers 
are criminals he will take birth to protect the world with the 
name Kalki, son of Viṣṇu Yaśā. 
Viṣṇu is a vast sea of being! Thousands of inexhaustible rivers and lakes 
come from this sea. Likewise, his incarnations are beyond count. All the 
sages, gods, progenitors, and the original lords of mankind, as well as 
their extremely powerful descendants, are portions of Viṣṇu. 
They are all fragments or expansions of Puruṣa. They all incarnate, age 
after age, to protect the world whenever the gods’ enemies disturb it. 
But among them all Kṛṣṇa is unique, because he is the All-Attractive One 
himself! 
Anyone who carefully recites this list of confidential incarnations of the 
All-Attractive in a spirit of devotion in the morning and evening gets 
freed from all misery. 

<<<PAGE 127>>>
127 
Getting Practical ~ Dhaniṣṭhā 
 
Name
Dhaniṣṭhā
Meaning
Steady sound
Symbol
Drum
Deity
Vasu – primordial elements
Main Stars
α to δ Delphini
 

<<<PAGE 128>>>
128 
Many explain the word dhaniṣṭhā as, “wealth (dhana) that is steady 
(niṣṭha).” But the more accurate meaning is, “sound (dhan) that is 
steady.”33 This understanding of the word dhaniṣṭhā makes it easy to 
understand why a drum serves as its symbol. 
An alternate name for this star is Śrāviṣṭhā.34  As we learned in the 
previous chapter, the word śrav- has to do with sound and hearing. 
Śrāviṣṭhā means, “that which is founded on sound and hearing.”  
Thus the best way to understand and translate the meaning of 
Dhaniṣṭhā is Steady Sound.  
The deities of Dhaniṣṭhā are the Vasu. The word vasu means “ray of 
light,” and, “something of excellence and goodness.” There are eight 
deities collectively called the Vasu. These deities are the excellent 
powers of the Supreme Divinity. They are like they rays of light 
expanding from the Supreme: Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Sky / Space, Sun, 
Moon, and Stars.35 
What do these eight elements have to do with “steady sound?”  
Many cultures share a concept that creation begins with sound. In the 
Christian Bible, for example, Genesis (1:3) says, “And God said, ‘Let 
there be light:’ and there was light.” Or John (1:1), “In the beginning was 
the Word, it was with God and it was God.” 
Vedic culture holds the same essential concept. Sound vibrates in 
“space”, which is the matrix in which everything exists and which exists 
within everything. Sound is at the root of every element and every 
creation. Sound therefore inspires change more effectively than 
anything else. We all know the power of music, but there are said to be 
                                                          
33 The root dhan means both “wealth” and “sound” – on the principle that 
those who have opulence become famous, well-known, praised, “heard.” 
34 Yet another name: In Bṛhat-saṁhitā, Varāha Mihira says that Vasu-deva can 
be used as another name for Dhaniṣṭhā, meaning “the star whose gods are the 
Vasu.” 
35 The exact details of this list vary somewhat from source to source.  

<<<PAGE 129>>>
129 
more powerful sound-formulae called “mantra” which can call things 
into being simply by sound.  
Since sound is the vibration that catalyzes space to bring forth all the 
other elements of creation, those elements (the Vasu) are literally 
śrāviṣṭhā or dhaniṣṭhā – things that “have their roots and foundation 
(niṣṭha) in sound (dhan).”  
The Vasu represent the tangible unfolding of cosmic power, the 
potential becoming kinetic. There is an important relationship to note 
between the former star, Śravaṇa (the star of hearing), and the current 
star, Śrāviṣṭhā  / Dhaniṣṭhā (the star of acting – putting into practice 
what you have heard). Dhaniṣṭhā empowers humanity to put knowledge 
and theories into practice; and make tangible, practical use of our plans 
and concepts. Dhaniṣṭhā is therefore a most practical star, favorable for 
accomplishing deeds and setting plans into motion. 
More Practical than Emotional or Romantic 
The Mahābhārata tells a fascinating tale involving the Vasu. It begins 
when they were enjoying a picnic one day in the forest. The wife of the 
Sky Vasu saw a beautiful cow wandering nearby. To please her, the Sky 
Vasu took the cow back to their abode when they returned home. 
This cow belonged to a powerful sage named Vasiṣṭha. When his cow 
did not return he used his mystical vision and saw that the Sky Vasu 
stole it. He laid a curse upon all of the eight Vasu: “Since you act like 
humans, you will all be born on Earth as humans!” 
When they learned of the situation the Vasu rushed to Vasiṣṭha to beg 
forgiveness. He lightened his curse thus, “Your birth will be extremely 
short, except for the Sky Vasu. He will have to live a full term.” 
The worried Vasu approached the River Ganges and asked her to 
become their mother and help them. Accepting their plea, she took the 
form of a beautiful woman and appeared out of the waters of the 

<<<PAGE 130>>>
130 
Ganges river on earth. A handsome king was doing worship on the shore, 
so she approached him and sat on his right thigh. 
He rebuked her, “Dear lady, only my daughter or daughter-in-law may 
sit there.” 
Ashamed by the king’s moral fortitude in the face of her licentious 
proposition, the Ganges returned into the water. But later, when that 
king’s wife had a son, the Ganges again appeared and the son fell in love 
with her. She agreed to become his wife on one condition, “you must 
never question anything I do.” 
She became pregnant seven times. Each time she immediately took the 
newborn to the Ganges and dropped the child in the water to drown! 
Thus seven of the eight Vasu were born very briefly as human beings, 
fulfilling the curse of Vasiṣṭha.  
When she was carrying the eighth child to the river, her husband could 
no longer tolerate the pain. He cried out, “O woman, what are you 
doing!?!?” Thereupon she turned around, placed the child in his arms, 
and disappeared into the waters. 
This eighth child was the Sky Vasu, who had to life an entire human 
lifetime as Bhiṣma, the “grandfather” in the epic tales of Mahābhārata. 
All the problems of the Vasu sprang from a romantic exchange 
between husband and wife. This explains why Dhaniṣṭhā has a 
reputation of being unfavorable to marriage. Bhīṣma himself 
never married or had any romantic relationship with a woman, 
despite his being the most attractive of princes.36 Dhaniṣṭhā is 
more concerned with the practical rather than the emotional or 
romantic. 
                                                          
36 Bhīṣma acted as the “grandfather” of his brothers’ children’s children. He 
was not literally anyone’s grandfather. 

<<<PAGE 131>>>
131 
The Underworld ~ Śatabhiṣaj  
 
Name
Śatabhiṣaj
Meaning
Hundreds of healers
Symbol
Empty or dark circle
Deity
Varuṇa - god of night sky
Main Stars
Sadachbia (γ Aquarii)
 

<<<PAGE 132>>>
132 
The name Śatabhiṣaj is made by combining śata + bhiṣaj. Śata means 
“100” or “a large number.” Bhiṣaj means a “healer” or a “cure.” So I 
translate it as “Hundreds of Healers” or “Hundreds of Cures.” 
Varuṇa is the deity empowering Śatabhiṣaj. In the oldest hymns of the 
Ṛg Veda, Varuṇa is the god of the night sky while his inseparable 
companion Mitra is the god of the daytime sky. 
The name Varuṇa literally means, “The All-Enveloping Sky.” Śatabhiṣaj’s 
empty-circle symbol is an image of the sky. Specifically, Varuṇa is the 
god of the half of the sky that hides (“envelopes”) the Sun. When the 
Sun falls below the western horizon it enters this enveloping half of the 
sky. Śatabhiṣaj’s empty circle also represents a “dark sun”.  
Since his domain begins where the Sun sets, Varuṇa is connected to 
sunset and the west. In fact, among the eight deities who guard the 
directions, Varuṇa is in charge of the west. 
Śatabhiṣaj is a star of aeronautics and other atmospheric 
endeavors. It is the star of western civilization and plays a 
significant role in the concomitant technological development of 
humanity. 
The Underground 
The Ṛg Veda declares that Varuṇa is the chief of the “Asura.” This does 
not make him a “demon,” it merely indicates that he is a force of 
darkness. Sura connotes “light” (thus the Sun is called Sura) and Asura 
connotes “darkness.” Since Varuṇa takes the Sun into darkness, 
naturally he is an Asura. 
But the demonic motif does extend a little further. The enveloping, dark 
sky is also dakṣināyaṇa, the “lower half of the universe.” The lower half 
of the universe is the “underworld.” Having dominion over the lower 
universe, Varuṇa also has dominion over the “underworlds.” He is to the 
underworld what Indra is to the heavens. 

<<<PAGE 133>>>
133 
Śatabhiṣaj promotes counter-culturalism and underground 
movements and social groups. 
Mysterious Depths 
In Vedic cosmology a cosmic ocean is said to exist in the lower half of 
the universal sphere. Varuṇa’s dominion over the underworld therefore 
also gives him dominion over water, and he also becomes famous as the 
god of waters. In Bhagavad Gītā (10.29), Śrī Kṛṣṇa indicates that Varuṇa 
is the foremost of all beings that dwell in the water:  varuṇo yādasām 
aham, “Among water-dwellers I am Varuṇa.” 
As we learned in the chapter on Pūrva Aṣāḍhā, Varuṇa is more precisely 
the husband of the waters, and Vāruṇī, his wife, is the actual goddess of 
water. 
Śatabhiṣaj is a nakṣatra with significant mysteriousness and 
allure, like the deep ocean. 
All-Seeing Justice 
Since he is the god of the night sky, the stars provide the light by which 
he sees. The stars are therefore said to be his eyes. There are more stars 
in Śatabhiṣaj (“hundreds”) than any other nakṣatra. Through these stars 
Varuṇa watches the hidden affairs of humans and arrests the 
duplicitous and deceitful in his divine noose.37  
Śatabhiṣaj is a star of justice and fair treatment, punishing 
whomever deserves punishment, without consideration of their 
status. It is therefore a source of revolutionary movements and 
liberal forces in human society. 
Doctors 
Atharva Veda, Taitterīya Saṁhitā, and Taitterīya Brāhmaṇa say: “The 
god of medicine himself cannot cure someone who falls ill when the 
Moon is in this nakṣatra.”  
                                                          
37 This noose is yet another signification of Śatabhiṣaj’s empty-circle symbol. 

<<<PAGE 134>>>
134 
Being the god of the underworld, Varuṇa has great control over the 
affairs of death. Being the god of waters, he has great control over the 
power to give life. Varuṇa is therefore treated in Ṛg Veda as the god of 
immortality; he holds the power of life and death. His is the star of 
healers and cures.  
Śatabhiṣaj has special medical significance. Illness with roots in 
this nakṣatra is very difficult to cure. And conversely, cures 
applied under the influence of this nakṣatra are highly effective. 
Ancient Equinoxes 
Varuṇa’s carrier is the fearsome sea-monster called a Makara (the 
creature we call a “Capricorn”). This, of course, is due to his lordship 
over the deep seas, but the symbolism also suggests that the very 
ancient Indians evaluated solstices and equinoxes, and may well have 
employed a twelvefold “zodiac” division based on them. 
 

<<<PAGE 135>>>
135 
The oldest hymns of Ṛg Veda most probably took formal shape about 
five thousand years ago when the Winter Solstice occurred with the 
heliacal rising of Śatabhiṣaj. By definition, the Winter Solstice is the 
beginning of Capricorn (“Makara”, Varuṇa’s vehicle). This suggests that 
the symbol for Capricorn may derive from Varuṇa, the god whose star 
held the Winter Solstice when the symbolism became decided. 
Varuṇa and Śatabhiṣāj’s connection to the winter solstice and Capricorn 
is yet deeper – because the winter solstice marks the end of 
dakṣināyaṇa – the six months the Sun spends moving towards Varuṇa’s 
“underworld.” 
Ancient locations of the other cardinal points in respect to the nakṣatra 
are also fascinating. In ancient Ṛg Vedic times the Summer Solstice 
would have occurred near the heliacal rising of the Nāga’s star, Āśleṣā. 
Varuṇa and the Nāga are close companions, since they rule the 
underworld together, the Nāga cooperating under Varuṇa’s leadership. 
The Summer and Winter solstices, which mark the entrance to and exit 
from the underworld, were guarded by the Nāga in Āśleṣā and Varuṇa in 
Śatabhiṣaj. 
The Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes, on the other hand, occurred in 
those ancient times with the heliacal rising of Kṛttikā and Anurādhā, 
respectively. Anurādhā belongs to Mitra, god of the daytime sky – the 
inseparable polar opposite of Varuṇa. Kṛttikā belongs to Agñi, the bright 
god of fire. 
The Dark Sun 
Although Varuṇa is an Asura, he is one of the children of Aditi – and 
therefore represents a form of the Sun: the dark sun; the midnight sun – 
a dark and empty circle. 

<<<PAGE 136>>>
136 
It may be interesting to note that most of the children of Aditi own 
nakṣatra. Ṛg and Yajur Veda name eight Ādityas, the eighth was rejected 
by his mother, but later redeemed.38   
1. Varuṇa   
deity of Śatabhiṣā 
2. Mitra 
 
deity of Anurādhā  
3. Aryamā  
deity of Uttara Phālgunī  
4. Bhaga   
deity of Pūrva Phālgunī  
5. Aṁśa 
 
 
6. Dhatṛ  
7. Indra 
 
deity of Jyeṣṭhā 
8. Mārtanda / Vivasvāna 
It is reasonable that the eighth Āditya has no star, since he was rejected 
by his mother, but what about the fifth and sixth, Aṁśa and Dhatṛ? In 
my estimation, Aṁśa (which means “ray” implying “resplendence”) is 
equivalent to Savitā, the deity of Hasta; and Dhatṛ is similarly equivalent 
to Tvaṣṭā, the deity of Citrā. 
So the complete list of Ādityas owning stars: 
1. Varuṇa   
deity of Śatabhiṣā 
2. Mitra 
 
deity of Anurādhā  
3. Aryamā  
deity of Uttara Phālgunī  
4. Bhaga   
deity of Pūrva Phālgunī  
5. Aṁśa / Savitā  deity of Hasta  
6. Dhatṛ / Tvaṣṭā  deity of Citrā  
7. Indra 
 
deity of Jyeṣṭhā 
8. Mārtanda / Vivasvāna 
                                                          
38 A later commentary on Yajur Veda (Satapatha Brahmana) expanded the 
number of Ādityas to 12. This list is again slightly different from the classical list 
of 12 Ādityas found in the Puranas. 

<<<PAGE 137>>>
137 
 

<<<PAGE 138>>>
138 
Destruction ~ Pūrva Bhādrapadā  
 
Name
Pūrva Bhādrapadā
Meaning
Blessed steps (I)
Symbol
Hearse
Deity
Ajaikapāt - fire-dragon
Main Stars
Markab and Scheat (α and β Pegasi)
 

<<<PAGE 139>>>
139 
This is the first of a pair of stars named Bhādrapadā, which means a 
“blessed step.” 
The shared symbol of the two Bhādrapadā is a hearse: a vehicle that 
carries a dead body to its final destination. How odd for a hearse to 
symbolize “blessed steps!” Reflecting on this, we should realize that the 
“steps” of the Bhādrapadā stars refer to the path on which we journey 
from this life to the next. 
Alternative symbols for Pūrva Bhādrapadā:  
• 
Swords, symbolizing the cutting of ties and attachments to our 
former life.  
• 
A man with two faces, symbolizing a soul looking in two 
directions: backwards towards the former life, and forwards 
towards the next. 
Pūrva Bhādrapadā is a serious star concerned with significant 
personal transformation. 
Two Dragons 
Another similarity between the two Bhādrapadā stars is their deity; 
both of whom are dragons of destruction.39 The first star in the pair, 
Pūrva Bhādrapadā, belongs to the fire dragon Ajaikapāt. The second, 
Uttara Bhādrapadā, belongs to the water dragon Ahirbudhnya. When 
Ajaikapāt is mentioned in the Veda, he is almost always mentioned 
along with Ahirbudhnya. The later tales of the Purāṇa40 treat the two as 
brothers, describing them both as sons of Viśvakarmā. 
“Ajaikapāt” – The Supernatural Serpent 
It is not easy to conclusively translate the word ajaikapāt. It is a 
compound with three parts: aja+eka+pada.  
                                                          
39 The deities of both stars are Nāga (dragons) and Rudra (destructive deities). 
40 For example: Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.15). 

<<<PAGE 140>>>
140 
• 
Aja means supernatural - without normal birth.  
• 
Eka means one. 
• 
Pada means foot, trail, path.  
There are many ways to meaningfully combine these three concepts. 
The most straightforward way I can think of is, “Supernatural Serpent.”  
A serpent is ekapad because it leaves a single trail as its footprint. A 
supernatural serpent is a Nāga, or “dragon.”  
The Nāga reign in the very wealthy underworld and have control over 
precious metals and gems. Mahābhārata (Udyoga 114.4) therefore 
describes Ajaikapāt as a lord of the Earth’s gold. 
Through Pūrva Bhādrapadā, Ajaikapāt empowers humans to 
acquire and accumulate wealth. 
Another important way to translate ajaikapāt is as the “single path to 
transcendence.” This resonates loud and clear with Pūrva Bhādrapadā’s 
symbols, such as the hearse – which takes a person on the blessed trail 
between one life and the next. 
By inclining human beings towards the path to the hereafter, 
Pūrva Bhādrapadā makes us more critical and pessimistic 
towards what is in the here and now. 
There are at least two other notable ways to translate ajaikapāt, both of 
which have to do with storms and both of which take the aja 
component with an alternate meaning of one who goes wherever he 
likes. Because of this meaning, aja can refer to mountain-goats and the 
drivers of vehicles. 
• 
“One-footed goat.” This is a poetic term for lightning, since 
lightning goes anywhere it likes (like a goat amongst the high 
mountains) without ordinary legs.   

<<<PAGE 141>>>
141 
• 
“One-legged driver.” This is a poetic reference to storms, whose 
driving winds move through the sky without conventional legs 
The Veda describes Ajaikapāt as a deity accompanied by floods, storms, 
and lightning. Taitteriya Brahmana (3.1.2) describes Ajaikapāt as a form 
or companion of the fiery Sun. The heat of the fiery sun evaporates the 
waters of the ocean, which then creates storms, lightning, rain and 
floods. Indeed, in Ṛg Veda (10.65.13), Ajaikapāt is described as the 
atmosphere and clouds, which “hold up the sky.” 
Storms are destructive forces controlled by the howling gods of 
destruction. Thus, the later Purāṇic tales41 classify him (and his brother 
Ahirbudhnya) as one of the eleven destructive gods called Rudra. 
The destructive force of Ajaikapāt is not to be overlooked when 
considering the nature of his star, Pūrva Bhādrapadā. After all, a 
hearse carries a corpse to its final destruction, usually (at least in 
Vedic times) to be cremated in fire.  
Although dangerous and destructive, storms are an important part of 
nature’s cycle. They enable the ecosystem to thrive and replenish itself. 
Reincarnation (renewal through death) is therefore a theme of 
the two Bhādrapadā stars. The first, Pūrva Bhādrapadā suggests 
the “front” of the hearse: the beginning of the process of 
reincarnation: the attempt to cut off attachments to the life one 
must leave behind. 
 
 
                                                          
41 For example: Mahābhārata (Adi 66.2) and Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (6.6.17-18) 

<<<PAGE 142>>>
142 
The Depths ~ Uttara Bhādrapadā 
 
Name
Uttara Bhādrapadā
Meaning
Blessed steps (II)
Symbol
Hearse
Deity
Ahirbudhnya - water-dragon
Main Stars
Algenib (γ Pegasi) & Alpheratz (α Andromedae)
 

<<<PAGE 143>>>
143 
Uttara Bhādrapadā is the second in the Bhādrapadā pair. Like the first, it 
is about “auspicious steps” - the path from this life to the next. Like the 
first, it deals with the theme of reincarnation and transformation, but 
where the previous Bhādrapadā approaches the theme in a difficult 
manner (the early steps on the “auspicious path”, wherein we must 
accept destruction and let go of our previous identities) the second star 
in the pair, Uttara Bhādrapadā, has a more pleasant angle because it 
represents the later steps on the “auspicious path”, during which we 
have already made peace with the loss and destruction of our old 
situation and are ready to embrace the transformation to our new state. 
Both Bhādrapadās are ruled by gods of destruction (Rudras) in the form 
of dragons (Nāgas). The dragon of Pūrva Bhādrapadā is surrounded by 
fire, a painful element. The dragon of Uttara Bhādrapadā, on the other 
hand, is surrounded by water, a soothing element.  
Uttara Bhādrapadā, like its twin, inclines human beings towards 
a transcendent and transformational path, but with more calm 
and less scorn compared to its predecessor. 
Being the star of a dragon, Uttara Bhādrapadā does incline 
humanity towards wealth. But the decidedly transformational or 
even “spiritual” nature of Uttara Bhādrapadā allows us to 
conceive of wealth as something more than just a financial 
entity. Much more than its predecessor, Uttara Bhādrapadā 
imparts generosity with wealth and an optimistic vision for the 
future. 
Dragon of the Deep 
The name Ahirbudhnya is a compound of two roots, ahi+budhnya. 
• 
Ahi refers to the sky42 
• 
Budhnya means bound to the root. 
                                                          
42 It is also sometimes used as an abbreviated address for Ahirbudhnya. English-
Sanskrit dictionaries thus also translate it as “serpent,” etc.  

<<<PAGE 144>>>
144 
In this case the “sky” refers to the entire cosmos. At the root of this 
cosmic sky is a powerful Nāga who holds the entire thing in place: 
Ahirbudhnya. In later tales Ahirbudhnya is more commonly referred to 
as Ananta Śeṣa, about whom we first learned in the chapter on Āśleṣā. I 
recommend rereading that chapter’s section on Ananta Śeṣa, 
particularly paying attention to the spiritual themes this divinity brings 
to Uttara Bhādrapadā. 
Since the lower half of the cosmos is thought to contain a type of cosmic 
“ocean”, and since Ahirbudhnya is at the very root of the cosmos, he 
dwells at the bottom of this ocean. Thus we can refer to him as “the 
dragon of the deep.” 
Uttara Bhādrapadā imparts a love for water, and all the classical 
qualities of the Water element: fertility, beauty, quietude, calm, 
introspection, and even a loneliness or sense of being separate 
and private from the world. 
Ahirbudhnya is an auspicious dragon, but a dragon nonetheless. So… 
Anger, aggression and envy sometimes manifest through Uttara 
Bhādrapadā, but the watery environs and spiritual temperament 
of Ahirbudhnya tends to make such things short lived and 
manageable.  

<<<PAGE 145>>>
145 
Abundance ~ Revatī  
 
Name
Revatī
Meaning
Generous prosperity
Symbol
Drum
Deity
Pūṣan - god of protection
Main Stars
ζ Piscium
 

<<<PAGE 146>>>
146 
The word revatī, a form of the root ṛd, means: “She who increases 
prosperity, success, fortune, wealth, and abundance.” Revatī is also the 
name of Śrī Balarāma’s wife. Balarāma is an avatāra of Viṣṇu who plays 
the role of Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother. 
Pūṣan is the deity of this nakṣatra. A synonym of revatī, the word pūṣan 
means: “One who nourishes, bringing growth and abundance.”43 
Pūṣan is one of the most important Vedic gods, whose role became 
much less significant as Indian religion moved away from ritual 
materialism towards philosophy and spirituality.  
Prosperous 
Pūṣan tends domestic animals, the agrarian equivalent of money. Ṛg 
(6.55.2) therefore describes Pūṣan as being fantastically wealthy.  Ṛg 
(6.55.4) describes him driving herds of goats. Ṛg (6.53.9) describes him 
herding cows who produce bliss and prosperity. Ṛg (6.54.5) describes 
him protecting domestic animals like cows and horses.  
Revatī inspires human beings to attain prosperity and wealth. 
Gentle & Loving 
Protection of animals inspires gentility and compassion. Not surprisingly, 
then, Ṛg (6.56.1-2) says that Pūṣan enjoys vegetarian foods as much as 
Indra enjoys drinking soma. He is especially fond of a milk-curd and rice-
meal mixture. From his vegetarian preference, we can understand that 
he is a gentle and kind deity. Indeed he is described as having “no teeth” 
(no “bite.”). 
Ṛg (6.57.5) describes Pūṣan as being “generous with affection.” 
                                                          
43 It is easy to mix the deity “Pūṣan” with the star “Puṣya.” There is an 
etymological link, and a similarity between the stars Revatī and Puṣya, but 
remember that Bṛhaspati is the deity of Puṣya, and Pūṣan is the deity of Revatī.  

<<<PAGE 147>>>
147 
Revatī inspires love, kindness, gentility and non-violence. It is 
therefore a prosperous influence on marriage and other loving 
relationships. 
Regarding how Pūṣan lost his teeth: According to Taittiriya Samhita, 
Pūṣan was in attendance at a ceremonial sacrifice to which Rudra was 
uninvited. Insulted, Rudra shot an arrow into the sacrificial offering just 
as Pūṣan was biting down on it. 
Bhāgavata Purāṇa (4.5) gives different details. It says the person holding 
the ceremony was Dakṣa, the father of Śiva’s wife, a woman who had 
just committed suicide in contempt for her father’s harsh insults of her 
husband. Śiva and his forces stormed the sacrifice, destroying 
everything. They cut off Dakṣa’s head and also punished other people 
who were implicated in the insults towards Śiva. Pūṣan’s teeth were 
kicked out because he showed a sympathetic smile while Dakṣa insulted 
Śiva. 
Thus Rudra’s Ārdrā and Pūṣan’s Revatī are incompatible and quite 
different in nature. 
Generous 
In Ṛg (6.53), the second verse describes Pusan’s blessings as “liberal and 
free-handed.”  The third says that Pūṣan makes even the stingy become 
generous, and even the hard-hearted become compassionate. The fifth 
through eighth verses say that Pūṣan’s (an agrarian tool that can double 
as a spear or knife) destroys the hearts of those who are greedy and 
avaricious, and inclines even them to devotion and love. 
Revatī inspires generosity, compassion and devotion. 
A Guide 
Pūṣan protects animals and humans from getting lost and falling to 
harm. In Ṛg (6.54) the first and second verses say that he sends guides 
to point out our objectives and show us the surest and straightest paths 
to them. 

<<<PAGE 148>>>
148 
The tenth verse says that Pūṣan blesses us to find whatever we have 
lost. 
Revatī inspires skill in finding lost items, and finding our way 
without becoming lost. It also inspires humanity to find 
trustworthy practical, moral, and spiritual guides, “gurus.” 
Pūṣan is also sometimes addressed in a role similar to the Pitṛ: helping 
the deceased soul find its way to the next destination. 
Pūṣan and Viṣṇu 
Like Viṣṇu, Pūṣan is on occasion referred to as Indra’s supporter and 
brother. Pūṣan’s qualities of gentility, devotion, guidance and goodness 
are very consistent with the qualities possessed by Viṣṇu. Some 
conjecture that Pūṣan may be an early or alternate vision of Viṣṇu; or, 
put another way, that the later conception of Viṣṇu incorporated the 
earlier conception of Pūṣan. The similarity between the two, and the 
association of the Viṣṇu-avatāra Balarāma with goddess Revatī, 
sometimes generates a misconception that Viṣṇu is the deity of Revatī. 
The Vedāṁga Jyotiṣa, however, is explicit: Viṣṇu is the god of Śravaṇa, 
and Pūṣan the god of Revatī.  
Nonetheless, due to the similarity of character in Pūṣan and Viṣṇu, 
Revatī has an effect very similar to the effect she would have if Viṣṇu 
were her deity. 
The Drum 
There is also a link between Dhaniṣṭhā and Revatī, since they both share 
the same symbol: a drum. Both nakṣatra allow fortune to manifest – 
providing the background “beat matrix” upon which the “melodious 
decorations of life” can exist. 
Revatī indicates fortune, and a good sense of rhythm.  

<<<PAGE 149>>>
149 
Interpretive Implications  
of the 27 Stars 
Now I will summarize the most important interpretive implications of 
each of the 27 Vedic stars. After the Sanskrit name of each star, I will 
give a catchphrase-cum-translation that I feel encapsulates the nature 
of the star. Then I will give a list of several key words that are extremely 
relevant to the star. Finally I will give a paragraph explaining many of 
those keywords in a little more detail. 
Aśvinī ~ The Beautiful Stallion 
Health, medicine, beauty, enjoyment, swiftness, loyalty 
Aśvinī is the star of health, beauty, and speed. It inspires the 
science of medicine: surgery and curing of illness (especially 
blindness). It increases our appetite for enjoyment but also our 
appreciation of loyalty and good character.  
Bharaṇī ~ Labor Pains 
Self-sacrifice, labor, effort, child-bearing 
Bharaṇī represents difficulties on the path to prosperity. It is the 
“pain” that leads to “gain.” It empowers humanity with self-
control and sobriety so that we can endure trials for the sake of 
producing something truly great.  
 
 

<<<PAGE 150>>>
150 
Kṛttikā ~ The Sharp Blade 
Incision, insight, brilliance, subdivision, critique, sharpness 
Kṛttikā is “bright” – brilliant, intellectual, and quick to digest .It is 
a star of insight, incisiveness, and dissection. It is analytical and 
critical and therefore not favorable towards things requiring 
tender care. 
Rohiṇī ~ The Blushing Bride 
Creativity, fertility, passion, beauty, inspiration, imagination 
Rohiṇī is the star of fertility & creativity; two traits always 
accompanied by passion and beauty. It is a star of motivation 
and all manner of creative talents. It abounds in imagination & 
procreation. It has a short-lived but hot temper when frustrated. 
Mṛgaśīrṣā ~ The Quest 
The search for goals and paths; quests 
Mṛgaśīrṣā is a star of searching for the best goal, and the best 
path to it. It empowers humanity to seek and quest, driving the 
human animal to sniff out the paths of life in search of true 
happiness. 
Ārdrā ~ The Storm 
Storms, destruction, frustration, blockade, spirituality 
Ārdrā is the storm that we must weather so that our nature can 
once again become pure and clean. It represents all the things 
we must overcome before we can prosper. It allows us to 
destroy inauspicious things and forget what should be forgotten. 
Given spiritual direction, Ārdrā empowers us to destroy the false 
ego and enter blessed realms. 

<<<PAGE 151>>>
151 
Punarvasu ~ Repeating Patterns 
Repetition, pattern, cause within effect; good offspring; unity, 
wholeness 
Punarvasu is about things happening again; Things happening 
within other things, within themselves; in cycles; in repetition. It 
is a star of good offspring and non-linear cognition. It empowers 
humanity to work cooperatively, become unified, seek holistic 
and all-embracing understandings, and to embrace a principle of 
all-inclusive divine love. 
Puṣya ~ The Highest Blossom 
Devotion, growth, flourishing, prosperity, morality, prayer, meditation 
Puṣya enables us to commune with deeper principles. This 
strengthens morality and causes prosperity and victory. It 
encourages faith, and ultimately leads to selfless devotional 
intimacy with the divine. 
Āśleṣā ~ Serpentine Embrace 
Luxury, pleasures, embraces, clinging, loyalty, jealousy, cunning 
Āśleṣā empowers us embrace strongly, with deep and enduring 
emotion and desire. It inspires us to bear great responsibilities 
for the sake of those we love. It endows us with charisma, 
charms and mystique. It has a weakness towards deception and 
jealousy, but strength towards deep mysticism and true 
spirituality.  
 
 

<<<PAGE 152>>>
152 
Maghā ~ Inherited Power 
Power, gifts, wealth, DNA, inherited traits, ancestors, past lives, afterlife, 
justice 
Maghā bestows gifts “from our ancestors.” This literally 
indicates inheritance of power, career, fortune, and qualities 
(“DNA”). Such inheritance really comes as a result of efforts 
made in our previous births, so Maghā also indicates powers, 
qualities and abilities carried over from past lives.  
Pūrva Phālgunī ~ Romantic Enjoyment 
Romance, love, enjoyment, expertise, romantic divinity 
Pūrva Phālgunī grants expertise and beauty, helping us enjoy a 
fulfilling and satisfying sensual and romantic life. It especially 
dissolves the distinction between material and spiritual, uniting 
the two through divine love. 
Uttara Phālgunī ~ Vows of Friendship 
Friendship, matchmaking, agreements, vows 
Uttara Phālgunī grants successful and enjoyable romance and 
love. It produces matchmakers and expert councilors in the arts 
of love and romance. It allows for successful resolution of 
arguments, and finding agreements, friendship and harmony.  
Hasta ~ Dexterity 
Dexterity, manipulation, hands; awareness, awakening, sunrise 
Hasta grants heightened awareness and dexterity, empowering 
us to manipulate tools and be physically agile. It makes us more 
observant and difficult to deceive and more capable of deceiving 
others. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 153>>>
153 
Citrā ~ Multifaceted Brilliance 
Intellect, ingenuity, creativity; technology, detail 
Citrā empowers humanity to comprehend multi-faceted designs, 
lay complex blueprints, and generate masterpieces and 
technological marvels. It is the star of architects, designers and 
engineers; and allows us to comprehend and give shape to many 
angles of a subject.  
Svāti ~ Individuality 
Individuality, distinction, maverick, separatism 
Svāti empowers us to be individuals capable of standing on our 
own and going against the norm if need be. It helps us clearly 
and confidently define “I” and individualize ourselves. It can 
inspire equally to self-realization or self-absorption. 
Viśākhā ~ Obsession 
Decisive, dedicated, fixated, goal-oriented, undistracted 
Viśākhā grants the ability to stay on course and to focus sharply 
on attaining goals. It creates strong dedication to clear 
objectives and fosters the ability to achieve those goals by any 
means necessary.   
Anurādhā  ~ Devotion 
Devotion, friendship, love as law, faithfulness 
Anurādhā grants deep devotion to friends and lovers. It makes 
our motivations more loving and selfless. It grants the ability to 
achieve objectives through good “people skills,” likeability and 
trustworthy dedication. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 154>>>
154 
Jyeṣṭhā ~ Eminence 
Eminent, jealous of rivals, protected by destiny, desirous 
Jyeṣṭhā empowers humans to become better than their peers, 
yet inclines us to be jealous of rivals. It grants us the ability to 
protect ourselves and ensure our victories, often by supernatural 
means. It inclines us to enjoy our power and eminence. 
Mūla ~ Uprooting 
Roots, origins, lawlessness, destruction, spirituality 
Mūla inspires humanity away from what is normal and accepted, 
towards what is hidden, deeper, more original and true. It is a 
star of lies and hidden things; and has the power to destroy 
them both to reveal the deepest truths. Mūla empowers 
destruction and allows us to destroy all that is superficial and 
illusory on our quest for true origins, true roots. 
Pūrva Aṣāḍhā ~ The Invincible 
Power, victory, appeal, popularity, strength, fertility, purity 
Pūrva Aṣāḍhā is a star of strength through purity. It confers 
strength and power to mankind, but in a pleasant manner, like 
the invincible yet appealing power of water. Being both 
appealing and powerful, Pūrva Aṣāḍhā creates leaders with 
significant popularity and mass appeal. 
Uttara Aṣāḍhā ~ Complete Victory 
Unchallengeable, undefeatable, intense and all-consuming 
Uttara Aṣāḍhā empowers human beings to give “110%” to their 
tasks, drawing all available power and pouring it into each of 
their endeavors. It is a star that helps create people who are 
undefeatable, even unchallengeable in their determination, 
strength, and intensity; and who can pull together many 
divergent resources and make them work for a common purpose. 

<<<PAGE 155>>>
155 
Śravaṇa ~ Listening Carefully 
Sound, listening, learning 
Śravaṇa is an excellent star for intelligence and education. 
Through it we become good listeners, speakers, and audio-
smiths. Śravaṇa inspires us to learn, ask intelligent questions, 
listen carefully to answers, and seek qualified teachers. It is one 
of the few stars that pleasantly turns us towards spiritual 
enlightenment. 
Dhaniṣṭhā ~ Getting Practical 
Practicality, ideas given shape, plans set in motion, substance given 
form 
Dhaniṣṭhā is a practical star, setting theories into practice and 
seeking tangible returns on ideas. It is too practical for things 
that require a lot of romance, sympathy, empathy and emotion.  
Śatabhiṣaj ~ The Underworld 
The sky, west, underground, night, depths, equality, medicine 
Śatabhiṣaj is the star of aeronautics, technology and western 
civilization. It is a profound and mysterious star promoting 
counter-culturalism and underground movements. It seeks 
liberal equality, and fair administration of justice, and is thus 
often a cause of revolutionary tendencies. It is also a star with 
special relevance to health and medicine. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 156>>>
156 
Pūrva Bhādrapadā ~ Destruction 
Transformation, death and the afterlife, (the need for) detachment, 
hoarding / holding on, pessimism, destruction, storms 
Pūrva Bhādrapadā is a serious star concerned with significant 
personal transformation. Inclining us towards personal 
transformation, it makes us more critical, pessimistic and 
destructive towards the here and now, and the wealth we are 
simultaneously inclined to accumulate in it. 
Uttara Bhādrapadā ~ Depth 
Transformation, afterlife, various types of wealth, generosity, optimism, 
depth, intuition, emancipation 
Uttara Bhādrapadā enables us to open our arms to 
transformation with an optimistic view of what we will become. 
It creates a love for water and imparts the traits of water, 
fertility, beauty, quietude, calm, introspection, depth and even a 
loneliness or sense of being separate and private from the world. 
Anger, aggression and envy are intense but short lived and 
manageable. 
Revatī ~ Abundance 
Prosperity, love, gentility, generosity, guidance, spirituality 
Revatī inspires human beings to attain true prosperity and 
wealth; through generosity, compassion, devotion and kindness. 
It blesses loving relationships, inclines us to non-violence, and 
helps us find our way forward without getting lost. It also grants 
a good sense of timing and rhythm.  

<<<PAGE 157>>>
157 
The 28th Star ~ Abhijit 
 
There is a “28th star,” Abhijit, which seems to be omitted from most 
considerations of Vedic Stars. There are various explanations offered for 
why it gets left out. Some say it fell out of favor when the Indians began 
embracing the 12 signs and wanted to create a symmetrical integration 
between their pre-existing star-groups and the newly adopted signs (27 
and 12 are mathematically compatible. 28 and 12 are not). I personally 
think the best explanation becomes evident when we look at what 
Abhijit really is: Vega, which is at some points in history the actual North 
Star. Abhijit is so far north of the ecliptic that the Moon never remotely 
enters its vicinity. So I think it is rightfully left out of the vast majority of 
astrological considerations. 

<<<PAGE 158>>>
158 
Use of the Stars 
Certainly a reasonably experienced and educated astrologer can simply 
look at what planets occupy which stars in an individual birth chart, and 
by combining the symbolism of the planet with the symbolism of the 
star you can gain volumes of useful interpretive information. Include the 
ascendant. The Moon begs to be considered the most important of the 
planets in this regard, but that is probably only because the Moon’s star 
is often also the star association with the day the chart’s owner was 
born. 
That point leads us to other equally, if not more important ways to use 
the stars. Look outside the conventional modern birthchart and into the 
details found in the “Kāla Jataka.” There, inquire into the nakṣatra of: 
• 
The birthday (and the “emptied” nakṣatras thereof) 
• 
The birth month 
• 
The full moon of that birth month 
• 
The muhūrta 
• 
The nadi 
• 
Jupiter’s year 
And learn to use the other information associated with nakṣatras, found 
in the kāla jataka, such as waxing / waning, lunar phase, lunar day, 
yogas, etc.  

<<<PAGE 159>>>
159 
Acknowledgements 
Cāndogya Upaniṣad 6.14.2 says: 
आचायवापु
षो वेद 
ācāryavān puruṣo veda 
“One who has an Ācārya [guru] personifies the Vedas.” 
Commenting on this, A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī  says, “One who is in 
association with great ācāryas, even if he is not educated or has never 
studied the Vedas, can become familiar with all the knowledge 
necessary for realization.” 
My Ācāryadeva is Śrī Śrīmad Dhanurdhara Swāmī. He introduced me to 
astrology in 1992 and sparked my interest in it. Although he is not an 
astrologer himself, he is a true Ācārya and therefore I was able to gain 
whatever astrological knowledge and expertise I have as a result of his 
divine blessings, without the need for any formal “astrological guru.” 
If he is pleased with this book, feeling that it is of benefit to humanity 
and that it glorifies the divine, then my effort is a success. Other 
yardsticks of success are inconsequential.   
I am also pleased to acknowledge the kind help of another agency of Śrī 
Guru, Dr. Satyanārāyana dās Bābājī, who is among the foremost 
scholars of Sanskrit and Vedic literature. He very kindly agreed to check 
the Sanskrit in this book, and review and comment on the manuscript. 
His corrections and suggestions were of paramount importance to 
making this a truly authorized and substantial book.  
I am also deeply indebted to Neal Stephens. I took up the task of writing 
this book partially due to his eagerness to study the Vedic Nakṣatra. His 
voluntary, selfless service of editing and proofreading was extremely 
helpful. 
 
 

<<<PAGE 160>>>
160 
 
 
In my every endeavor I am always happily indebted to 
My loving wife,  
Śyāma Sakhi, 
And our dear children: 
Bhanu,  
Damien,  
Lunetta and  
Lalitā. 
 
कराेवसतेलिमः करमयेसरवत | 
करमूलेतुगोवदः भातेकरदशनम् || 
It appears that a man named Vic DiCara wrote this book. 
However, the Goddess Lakṣmī actually wrote it, empowering his fingers 
to strike the keys. But the truth is that Goddess Sarasvati truly wrote the 
book, having the knowledge and learning that allowed the typing fingers 
to move. Yet, the final reality at the root of it all is that Govinda himself 
wrote the book – to reveal himself to you more clearly. 
$ी$ीराधागोवदौ जयतौ 

<<<PAGE 161>>>
