# source: _OceanofPDF.com_27_Stars_27_Gods_The_Astrological_Mythology_of_Ancient_India_-_Vic_DiCara.pdf
# pages: 1-60
# compiled into: nakshatras.json (deity, shakti)
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 1>>>

<<<PAGE 2>>>
1 
EJ ZÉwá  
EJ fàtÜá 
The Astrological Mythology  
of Ancient India 
By Vic DiCara 
(Vraja Kishor das) 

<<<PAGE 3>>>
3 
Contents 
Introduction .............................................................................................. 5 
The Beautiful Stallion ~ Aśvinī .................................................................. 8 
Labor Pains ~ Bharaṇī ............................................................................. 14 
The Sharp Blade ~ Kṛttikā ....................................................................... 19 
The Blushing Bride ~ Rohiṇī .................................................................... 24 
The Quest ~ Mṛgaśīrṣā ........................................................................... 31 
The Storm ~ Ārdrā .................................................................................. 35 
Repeating Patterns ~ Punarvasu ............................................................ 41 
The Highest Blossom ~ Puṣya ................................................................. 48 
Serpentine Embrace ~ Āśleṣā ................................................................. 53 
Inherited Power ~ Maghā ...................................................................... 61 
Romantic Enjoyment ~ Pūrva Phālgunī ................................................. 65 
Vows of Friendship ~ Uttara Phālgunī ................................................... 72 
Dexterity ~ Hasta .................................................................................... 75 
Multifaceted Brilliance ~ Citrā ................................................................ 80 
Individuality ~ Svāti ................................................................................ 87 
Obsession ~ Viśākhā ............................................................................... 92 
Devotion ~ Anurādhā ............................................................................. 96 
Eminence ~ Jyeṣṭhā .............................................................................. 102 
Uprooting ~ Mūla ................................................................................. 109 
(hyperlinked pages)

<<<PAGE 4>>>
4 
The Invincible ~ Pūrva Aṣāḍhā ............................................................. 113 
Complete Victory ~ Uttara Aṣāḍhā ...................................................... 118 
Listening Carefully ~ Śravaṇa ............................................................... 121 
Getting Practical ~ Dhaniṣṭhā .............................................................. 127 
The Underworld ~ Śatabhiṣaj .............................................................. 131 
Destruction ~ Pūrva Bhādrapadā ........................................................ 138 
The Depths ~ Uttara Bhādrapadā ....................................................... 142 
Abundance ~ Revatī ............................................................................. 145 
Interpretive Implications of the 27 Stars .............................................. 149 
The 28th Star ~ Abhijit ........................................................................... 157 
Use of the Stars .................................................................................... 158 
Acknowledgements .............................................................................. 159 
 
 

<<<PAGE 5>>>
5 
Introduction  
Look up at the night sky; countless stars will delight and fascinate you! 
The most beautiful object in the nighttime sky has got to be the Moon. 
It particularly captivated the hearts and minds of ancient Indians – who 
watched it travel through the glistening circle of stars every 27 days. 
So the Indians, like many other ancient cultures, developed 27 
constellations. They conceived of these heavenly lights as repositories 
of the powers of the gods.  
Indian astrology, often called “Vedic Astrology,” has become quite 
popular throughout the world today. The true heart of this astrology, its 
original core, is the 27 stars. To interpret their meaning, the most 
important thing to have is a deep and lucid understanding of the gods 
that empower them.  
Before diving into this exciting topic, please allow me to address a few 
important misconceptions about the stars 
The Stars are not the Signs 
The most prevalent and long-standing misconception about the 27 stars 
is that they are permanently linked with certain zodiac signs.  
The 12 zodiac signs are based on the movement of the Sun, which we 
measure by observing its solstices and equinoxes. The 27 constellations 
are based on the movement of the Moon, which we measure by 
observing it moving through the stars. These different ways of 
measuring space don’t stay aligned to one another: The solstice Sun, for 
example, drifts very slowly through the stars year by year. So, there is 
no permanent relationship between the stars and the signs.  

<<<PAGE 6>>>
6 
Indians have known this since antiquity. 
• 
Books written by them at different points in history 
acknowledge different stars as being the “first” by virtue of 
rising with the equinox.1  
• 
The Purāṇas note that the big dipper gradually changes its 
orientation to the horizon.2  
• 
Surya Siddhānta explicitly states that the equinox moves in 
relation to the stars.3  
• 
A clear distinction between stars and tropical signs is made 
throughout Sanskrit literature. 4  
Although the ancient Indians were well aware of the fundamental 
difference between signs and stars, most modern Indian astrologers are 
confused about it. Over the last several centuries they have fused the 
two, creating the misconception that the 12 signs are stellar, and that 
the 27 stars are some sort of secondary, awkward subdivision of them. 
At least while you are reading this book, please try to forget this 
misconception, and whatever you might have learned about the 27 
stars that explains them as if they were subdivisions of zodiac signs. 
Since there is no permanent relation between stars and signs, the 
meaning of the stars has nothing to do with the signs they temporarily 
coincide with. 
                                                          
1 For example, the earliest Vedas, like Ṛg and Atharva were written when the 
Pleiades rose with the Sun on the vernal equinox and identify the Pleiades as 
the “first” star. Purāṇas written much later identify β Arietis as the “first” star 
because the vernal equinox had drifted to β Arietis when those books were 
written. 
2 For example, see Bhāgavatam 12.2.27-32. 
3 3.9-10. 
4 For explicit non-stellar tropical definition of the 12 signs see Viṣṇu Purāṇa 
2.8.26-30, Bhāgavata Purāṇa 5.21.2-6, Sūrya Siddhānta 14.7-10, and even 
perhaps Ṛg 1.164.43. 

<<<PAGE 7>>>
7 
The Stars have no “Planetary Lords” 
Another prevalent misconception is that the stars have “planetary lords” 
who play a role in forming the character of the star. This mistaken idea 
arises because Indian astrology associates the stars to specific planets 
when calculating astrological time phases (nakṣatra-daśā). But even 
then there is no permanent correlation between planets and stars 
because there are dozens of nakṣatra-daśā systems, and each one 
associates different planets with different stars.  
At least for now, please forget any explanation of the 27 stars that talks 
about their “planetary lords.” The 27 Stars are ruled by gods, not by 
planets.  
To Understand the Stars, You Must Understand the 
Gods 
The easiest way to deeply and clearly understand the 27 Vedic stars is to 
deeply and clearly understand the Vedic gods that empower them. That 
is a big task, but if we let the name and symbol of each star focus our 
attention on specific aspects of the gods, we will in the course of a 
single small book be able to communicate a very effective and 
significant intimacy with these ancient stars.  
Most of the book will familiarize you with the 27 gods of these stars, 
highlighting the astrological relevance of names, symbols and myths. 
After that, I will summarize in a concise format the practical astrological 
effect of each star. 

<<<PAGE 8>>>
8 
The Beautiful Stallion ~ Aśvinī 
 
Name
Aśvinī
Meaning
A beautiful stallion
Symbol
A horse
Deity
Aśvinī Kumāra -
Twin gods of health  
Main Stars
Twin stars: β and γ Arietis
 

<<<PAGE 9>>>
9 
The horse is a symbol of beauty and health: both of which are 
instrumental in enjoying life. So, it is a perfect symbol to summarize the 
nature of Aśvinī.  
I will tell you some tales about the gods of Aśvinī, highlighting their 
connection to the horse symbol. 
Born from Horses 
Viṣṇu Purāṇa (2.3): 
The Sun’s wife needs a break now and then. Her husband is hot – 
literally. So she regularly goes off to recuperate and build up her 
strength again to deal with his immense heat. She didn’t want to 
depress or insult her husband so, being a goddess and no ordinary 
woman, she came up with the idea to make a clone of herself to take 
care of normal affairs in her absence. She hoped the Sun god would not 
even notice her absence. 
Sūrya (the Sun god) already had three children with her: Manu (from 
whom came human beings), Yama (lord of death) and Yamī (the river 
Yamuna). Now, while his wife was away, he made three more children 
with her clone: Śani (the god of Saturn), a second Manu, and Tapatī 
(another river). 
All was well and good until one day the clone-wife got really angry and 
cursed her “son” Yama. Sūrya realized, “This can’t be Yama’s mother. A 
mother would never curse her own son so harshly.” Sūrya took the form 
of a horse and tracked his real wife to a forest where she was 
meditating for recuperation. She also took the form of a horse and tried 
to flee. Surya caught up to her and, as horses, they had a third batch of 
three children: The Aśvinī twins and a son named Revanta. 
Mahābhārata Adi.66.35 adds that the twins were born from each nostril 
of their horse-mother.  
So, the gods of Aśvinī were born from horses.  

<<<PAGE 10>>>
10 
The Horse Head Loophole 
Ṛg Veda (22.116): 
Indra (king of the gods) knew a how to produce secret, powerful elixirs 
like Soma and did not want this knowledge to get into the wrong hands. 
He taught it to sage Dadichi but laid a curse upon him: “If you teach this 
to anyone your head must come off.” 
The Aśvinī twins wanted to learn this secret! So, being master surgeons, 
they cut off the sage’s head and the head of a horse and swapped the 
two. Through “the horse’s mouth” they learned the secrets they sought. 
Then they swapped the heads back to their original owners. Thus they 
made a loophole which diffused the curse of Indra.  
This illustrates that skill in surgery is a theme of Aśvinī. 
Curing the Blindness of a Friend 
Ṛg Veda (16.115):  
Once, the divine horse that belonged to the Aśvinī twins took the shape 
of a wolf. One young man collected 100 goats from the locals and fed 
them to this wolf. The man’s father became very angry that his son stole 
from others, and cursed his son to become blind. The young man 
appealed to the Aśvinī twins, who were very sympathetic and cured his 
blindness.  
This illustrates that Aśvinī’s medical expertise is particularly 
suited towards improving sensual acuity, “curing blindness.” 
Curing a Blind Old Sage 
Devī Bhāgavata (7) & Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (9.3): 
A beautiful young princess named Sukanya once semi-unknowingly 
poked the eyes of an old hermit named Cyavana, making him blind. To 
apologize for the act, she married him and cared for him very faithfully 
and wonderfully.  

<<<PAGE 11>>>
11 
One day the Aśvinī twins saw her alone, collecting various things from 
the deep forest where she lived with the hermit. They boldly proposed 
that she abandon the old blind man and take one of them as her new 
husband. She became very angry with them and said, “If you don’t shut 
up and get out of here, my curses will burn you to ashes!” 
The twins were extremely impressed and proposed a new idea. “OK,” 
they said, “We will repair your husband’s blindness and we will make 
him completely youthful and handsome. How does that sound?” 
It sounded very suspicious to her. “What’s the catch?” She asked. 
“The catch is,” they answered, “once this is done you will not be able to 
visually distinguish him from us. And you will have to pick which one of 
the three of us is really your husband. Whomever you select will then be 
your husband from that moment on.” 
She didn’t like the idea at all, but didn’t want her husband to miss the 
opportunity to regain his sight. So she took the twin gods home and 
explained the situation to her husband. “Oh, that’s fine. No problem,” 
her husband said with complete confidence. “Let’s do it immediately.” 
So the twins took the hermit to a nearby lake and the three of them 
entered it. When they later emerged from the lake all three looked 
alike: glowingly youthful and handsome men with perfect eyesight. 
Praying to her goddess for protection the young princess easily selected 
her true husband from the look-alikes. The Aśvinī twins were quite 
pleased to witness the deep purity of this woman. 
This story illustrates many themes of Aśvinī: medical marvels, 
health, beauty, vision, loyalty, and an appetite for enjoyment.  
Curing a Blind Disciple 
Mahābhārata (Adi.3.34-77): 
A guru had a very plump disciple who tended to his cows. He asked, 
“My dear boy, why are you so fat?” 

<<<PAGE 12>>>
12 
“I beg alms from the householders.” 
“The student should beg on behalf of the guru, not on his own behalf. 
So give those alms to me,” the Guru said. 
But several days later, the disciple was still fat. “Why are you still fat?” 
The Guru asked. 
“After begging for you I again beg to get my meals,” the disciple 
explained. 
“That is no good” said the guru. “You are making people give you all 
their food. How will they eat? Don’t do that anymore.”  
Several days later the disciple was still fat. “Why are you still fat?” 
“I milk the cows and drink,” said the disciple. 
“Why? Those are my cows, not yours. Don’t do that anymore.”  
But several days later the disciple was still fat. “Why?” asked the guru. 
“When the calves drink, I drink what they spill.” 
“Don’t do that,” replied the guru. “Calves are naturally sympathetic. 
They are spilling the milk on purpose for your sake and are going hungry 
themselves.” 
Now the disciple was really getting hungry. He would grab some leaves 
from the trees and eat them. They were horrible and poisonous and 
made him go blind in a few days. With failing vision he fell painfully into 
a well. The guru found him there and said, “Just pray to the Aśvinī twins. 
They will cure your blindness.” Then he left. 
The disciple did so. The twins appeared before him and said, “Eat this 
cake it will cure you.” 
“I can’t eat what I get from others. I must give everything to my guru.” 

<<<PAGE 13>>>
13 
“It’s OK,” explained the Aśvinī. “Your guru himself fell into the same 
situation as you and we cured him in this same manner. He did not offer 
the medicinal cake to his guru, he just ate it. You can follow his example.” 
“No, no. I cannot. I will have to remain blind if I cannot give this bread to 
my guru.” 
The Aśvinī were so impressed they blessed him, “Your blindness is 
cured! You will be always prosperous and happy. Your teeth will be pure 
gold, and your guru’s teeth will turn to iron.” It immediately came to 
pass.  
The guru was very pleased to have broadcast the superexcellent 
dedication of his disciple (And it doesn’t seem like he was troubled 
much by his iron teeth, either.) 
This illustrates the same themes as the previous two stories. 
Miscellaneous 
Mahābhārata (Droṇa.62.3): A male once became pregnant. Of course 
the baby could not be delivered normally. The Aśvinī twins performed a 
caesarean birth. This illustrates the power of Aśvinī to perform medical 
marvels. 
Ṛg Veda (11.112) says that the Aśvinī can bring rain during a draught. 
Similarly Ṛg (9.16) says the Aśvinī dug a hole in the desert and it became 
a well. This is probably a glorification of the star to communicate the 
fact that many problems can be overcome by starting the effort when 
the Moon is in Aśvinī.  
Worship of the Aśvinī Kumāra improves beauty. 

<<<PAGE 14>>>
14 
Labor Pains ~ Bharaṇī 
 
Name
Bharaṇī
Meaning
Bearing children
Symbol
Vulva, downward-triangle
Deity
Yama - god of death
Main Stars
The dim triangle: 41, 39 and 25 Arietis.
 

<<<PAGE 15>>>
15 
The name Bharaṇī comes from the word bharaṇa, which means, “to 
maintain, bear, support.” The English phrase, “bearing children” or 
“labor pains” expresses it perfectly. The vulva is an excellent symbol for 
Bharaṇī because it symbolizes bearing children, which itself summarizes 
the main characteristic of this star: bringing new life into the world at 
the cost of great labor and pain. 
It seems odd that the powers of Yama, the god of death, reside in the 
star which bears new life. This highlights the fact that life and death are 
inseparable and new life is impossible without the death of the old. As 
expressed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-Gītā (2.27): 
“Death is certain for one who is born.  
Birth is certain for one who dies.” 
Life Needs Death 
The fundamental character of Bharaṇī is that good things cannot come 
without difficulties. Illustrating this, Mahābhārata (Vana.142) tells a 
story of life being unable to continue without death. The story takes 
place in the “First Age” of history, during which time humans have 
extremely long lifespans. Yama, the god of death, therefore thought it 
would be OK to take a break for a while. But the population of the Earth 
quickly became too great and she could not support everyone. 
Overpopulation began to cause serious problems. The gods appealed to 
Viṣṇu, who took the form of a boar to lend strength to the earth. Yama 
came back to his duties (making sure people die) and the situation came 
back to normal. 
In another section (Ādi.199), Mahābhārata tells a similar story. Yama 
once took the position of chief priest in a very long religious ritual, 
putting his duties as the god of death on hold for many, many years. 
Everything was getting out of balance in the world because no one was 
dying, so all the gods begged Yama to stop and go back to his normal 
duties. When he did, people started dying again and everything 
returned to normal. 

<<<PAGE 16>>>
16 
Death may not be pleasant, but it is good and important. 
Bharaṇī is like that: it contains the sacrifices that must be made 
to produce something worthwhile; difficulties must be endured 
to produce something great. 
Death of Death 
This next story illustrates a similar point. There are a few slightly 
different versions it, this telling is found in Padma Purana:  
Once upon a time, a young boy was told that he would die when he 
turned sixteen. Seeking protection from this fate, the boy sat in yogic 
meditation before a deity of Śiva. When he turned sixteen, the agents of 
Yama tried to take him, but could not approach him due to the power 
he had accumulated. Yama himself appeared personally with his noose. 
But when he threw the noose, the boy leapt upon and embraced his 
deity, crying for protection. The noose encircled both the boy and the 
deity, who became furious at what death appeared to be attempting. 
The deity sprang to life and burned the god of death to ashes.  
All the gods appealed to Śiva to reconsider what he had just done. 
Without death, how would the world continue to function as it was 
intended by Viṣṇu? Accepting this, Śiva brought Yama back to life after 
granting the boy, Mārkeṇḍeya, an extremely long lifespan. 
Like the boy, we also try to escape the challenges of Bharaṇī. But 
as the story goes his efforts caused more harm than good, 
creating a calamity that required extensive divine intervention 
and troubled all the gods. We are not supposed to avoid Bharaṇī. 
We are supposed to embrace it just as a mother must embrace 
labor contractions if she wishes to later embrace her beautiful 
child. 
The boy meditated upon a famous mantra from Ṛg (7.59.12) and Yajur 
Veda, the mahā-mṛtyuṁ-jaya (“the great triumph over death”). This 
mantra can be effective for dealing with Bharaṇī if one chants it with 
the intention not escape ones difficulties, but to prosper from them:  

<<<PAGE 17>>>
17 
Oṁ 
tryambakaṃ yajāmahe  
sugandhiṃ puṣṭi-vardhanam  
urvārukam iva bandhanān  
mṛtyor mukṣīya māmṛtāt. 
Escaping Bharaṇī  
Śrīmad  Bhāgavatam (6.1-3) tells the story of a man who did escape the 
noose of Yama:  
 
Once, there was a pious man who worshipped Nārāyaṇa (Viṣṇu), but 
whose mind got infected with base desires upon seeing lewd behavior. 
He soon abandoned his family and dedicated everything he had to a 
prostitute. Eventually they had a child, whom he named Nārāyaṇa. At 
the moment of his death, he saw the agents of Yama approaching and 
cried out for his son, “Nārāyaṇa!" 
The agents of Viṣṇu arrived immediately and forbade the agents of 
Yama from taking the man. “A person able to fix their minds on God 
while they are dying does not require any additional corrections,” they 
declared. Yama himself agreed that this was true. The man was released 
and engaged in purifying deeds for the rest of his life before attaining 
liberation. 
As illustrated here, the names of Viṣṇu help us deal productively with 
the labor pains of Bharaṇī, by making us more devotional and self-
sacrificing.  The man in this story was even more successful than the boy 
in the previous story. So the most efficacious mantra for dealing 
productively with Bharaṇī is one composed of Viṣṇu’s names. Kali 
Santarana Upanishad (an appendix to Yajur Veda) specifically 
recommends: 
hare kṛṣṇa, hare kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa, hare hare 
hare rāma, hare rāma, rāma rāma, hare hare 

<<<PAGE 18>>>
18 
Restriction 
Bharaṇī is like the child cramped within the womb: It is a difficult star of 
struggles and restrictions. Indeed, the name of the god of death, Yama, 
literally means restriction / regulation. Death is merely the ultimate 
regulation, the most inescapable restriction. 
In Bhagavad-Gītā (10.29), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:  
yamaḥ saḿyamatām aham  
“Among enforcers I am Yama.”  
Bharaṇī represents difficulties we must face before we can prosper. It is 
a star of yama: limitation and restriction. To face such trials we must 
develop yama: self-control.  
Note on Yama and Dharma 
The god of death (Yama) and the god of morality (Dharma) are different 
beings, frequently confused to be one. It’s easy to see how this 
confusion would arise: Dharma (the god of morality) is also called Yama 
because morality requires self-control (yama). And the Yama (the god of 
death) is also called Dharma - because he judges people after death on 
the basis of their morality (dharma). Despite sharing names, however, 
they are different beings, and it is Yama, not Dharma, who empowers 
Bharaṇī. 

<<<PAGE 19>>>
19 
The Sharp Blade ~ Kṛttikā 
 
Name
Kṛttikā
Meaning
Cutter, divider
Symbol
Sharp blades
Deity
Agñi – god of fire
Main Stars
The bright blue Pleiades
 
 
 

<<<PAGE 20>>>
20 
The word kṛttikā comes from the kṛtta / kartati, meaning “cut, divide.” 
Obviously the symbol of sharp blades is fitting. But the word is also 
related to the root kṛt which means “assemble, accomplish.” So the 
sharpness of Kṛttikā is not a barbarian blade! It is a careful tool of 
precise subdivision. Similarly, Kṛttikā is a star of insight, incisiveness, 
disassembly of complex things, and detailed comprehension. 
Agñi, the god of fire, empowers Kṛttikā. Fire has two qualities: it is bright, 
and it is hot. Brightness illuminates. Heat burns, or “digests,” it liberates 
the energy within things. Kṛttika is not only incisive but “bright.” It is a 
star of intellectual, brilliant insights and the ability to quickly digest 
concepts and ideas. The English word “critical” likely comes from kṛttikā. 
It is a star of incisive, critical thought.  
Kṛttikā is not a good star for anything requiring tenderness, but it is 
excellent for analysis, rapid and accurate assessment, and the ability to 
cut through problems and confusions. 
The Sharp, Divided Child of Fire 
To tell you this story, I will combine the versions given in Mahābhārata 
(Vana.223-227), Vālmikī Rāmāyaṇa (Bālakāṇḍa.36) and Brahmāṇḍa 
Purāṇa (81): 
Once, during a ritual, Agñi saw the wives of the seven sages and fell in 
love with them. He transformed into their household fire to 
clandestinely gaze upon their beauty. But eventually he reproached 
himself thoroughly and went off to the forest to lament his broken 
heart.  
A goddess named Svāhā had been in love with Agñi for a long time, and 
saw this as her chance. She assumed the appearance of one of the 
sage’s wives and ran to Agñi, saying, “I am Śivā, the wife of Sage Angiras. 
I have come to fulfill all your desires.”  
After their intercourse she transformed into a bird, and flew to a 
legendary mountain from which the sun rises. There she threw Agñi’s 

<<<PAGE 21>>>
21 
semen into a lake. Then she assumed the form of the wife of a different 
sage and repeated the whole process five more times. She could not 
impersonate the seventh wife, Arundhati, due to the power of 
Arundhati’s devotion to her husband Vasistha. 
Meanwhile, an anti-god named Tāraka rose to power and conquered all 
the gods on the strength of a benediction that only a seven-day-old 
child could kill him.  
The gods tried to have children, but because of a curse they could not. 
Not even Śiva and his wife Pārvatī could conceive, even after attempting 
for 100 celestial years! Their powerful efforts put the universe into 
distress and the gods requested that Śiva and Pārvatī desist. Śiva, 
however, was interrupted just in the process of discharging semen. He 
said, “You’ve infuriated my wife by this disruption! Now tell me, what 
womb shall bear my seed?” 
The gods suggested that the Earth become the womb. This infuriated 
Pārvatī even further and she cursed the Earth to be unable to bear the 
child. Śiva’s seed caused a great disturbance to the earth and there 
were floods and havoc. The gods requested powerful Agñi, the god of 
fire, to bear the seed – so he took it within the womb of flame. But he 
too fell under the angry curse of Pārvatī and could not develop the seed 
into a child. The effort exhausted him and fire began to dim and cool. 
Agñi approached the goddess Ganges, who said, “Put the seed into my 
waters.” But she also faced failure and frustration until she learned that 
Angi’s seed had been planted five times beside a lake on the Mountain 
of Sunrise. She added Śiva’s to this.  
The mountain soon produced gave birth to a ferociously powerful child, 
who began destroying the hillside and howling with a voice like thunder. 
The seven sages attempted to remedy this terrible disturbance. The 
inhabitants of the forest told them that six of their wives were to blame. 
In anger, the sages divorced those six wives and sent them away. (They 

<<<PAGE 22>>>
22 
cut off their wives, divorced them – the literal meaning of Kṛttikā is to 
cut off and separate).5  
The child could not be pacified and even the gods dared not openly 
oppose him. Instead they sent the six divorced wives of the sages (the 
Kṛttikas) to tame the child and then kill him with poison on their breasts. 
But the women became compassionate towards the boy and accepted 
him as if he truly were their own son.  
Since six women came to feed him, he split (“kṛttika”) into six forms to 
nurse from each mother simultaneously. He is known as Kārtikeya 
because he was nursed by the Kṛttika. 
Pacified by these six mothers, the child then greeted his father Agñi.  
Next arrived Śiva, Pārvatī, the Earth Goddess and Ganga. All of whom 
had valid claims to being his parent. The boy had six forms. One of them 
remained with the six Kṛttikas, another remained with Agñi, another 
went to Śiva, Pārvatī, Ganga, and to the Earth.  
When the supernatural child was only seven days old, the gods put him 
in charge of their armies and attacked the anti-gods. The powerful 
newborn destroyed Tāraka and returned the balance of power to the 
gods.  
Killing Children 
Mahābhārata (Vana.230): 
Agñi’s child told his six mothers, “Until I am sixteen years old, I will be 
an evil spirit killing children, slicing them up and eating them.” 
It is well known that warfare kills children and deprives them of 
their parents. Fire, which creates acidity in organisms, also 
                                                          
5 The seven stars of the Big Dipper represent the seven sages. The six main 
stars of the Pleiades are their six divorced wives – unfortunate goddesses. The 
seventh wife, Arundhati remains near her husband Vasiṣṭha as the star Alcor 
very close to Mizar. 

<<<PAGE 23>>>
23 
diminishes fertility. Thus Kṛttikā is inauspicious for children and 
childbirth; as it is for all things that require gentleness and 
softness. 
The Story of Śibi 
This story from Mahābhārata (Vana.131) involves Agñi, and slicing, and 
is a great tale, so I will tell it here, in spite of the fact that it may not be 
entirely relevant to the astrological nature of Kṛttikā: 
A King named Śibi was the most generous and charitable person in 
history. Indra and Agñi wanted to demonstrate the extent of his 
willingness for self-sacrifice so Angi became a dove and flew onto the 
king’s lap while Indra became a hawk who tried to swoop down to eat 
the dove.  
The king drove off the hawk, who then protested, “Why have you stolen 
my food?” 
The king replied, “The dove has taken shelter of me, so I must protect it. 
Since you are hungry, I will feed you something else.” 
But the hawk would not accept anything in exchange for the dove. Śibi 
even offered his entire kingdom to the hawk, to no avail. Finally, the 
hawk accepted an amount of Śibi’s own flesh equal to the weight of the 
dove. 
When Śibi placed the dove and a piece of his thigh on a scale, the dove 
was heavier. Again and again he would slice off his flesh, but no matter 
how much he added, the dove was always heavier. When the terribly 
wounded king was about to put his entire body onto the scale, Agñi and 
Indra took their original forms, blessed him and brought him into 
paradise. 

<<<PAGE 24>>>
24 
The Blushing Bride ~ Rohiṇī  
 
Name
Rohiṇī
Meaning
A rosy, blushing lady
Symbol
Bull pulling a cart of abundant produce; 
Banyan tree 
Deity
Brahmā – forefather and creator
Main Star
The red star: Aldebaran
 
 

<<<PAGE 25>>>
25 
Everything about this star symbolizes fertile creativity. 
• 
The name Rohiṇī means, “red-girl.” That literally means a girl 
who is fertile, having entered puberty and begun her 
menstruation. Or you can take it as a “blushing bride.” Either 
way, Rohiṇī means “procreation”, and procreation means 
creativity and fertility. 
• 
Rohiṇī’s symbol, a bull, is a symbol of male fertility. The bull 
pulls a cart overflowing with produce; another symbol of 
fertility. 
• 
Rohiṇī’s other symbol, a tree, is a symbol of fertility because 
trees produce fruit, which are symbolic of children. The specific 
tree that symbolizes Rohiṇī is the Banyan, which is a particular 
symbol for fertility and growth because the Banyan tree never 
stops growing and expanding. 
• 
Rohiṇī’s deity, Brahmā, is the father of all creatures, the original 
progenitor, and is therefore a symbol of fertility. Brahmā is also 
the creator of everything in the universe, and thus a symbol of 
creativity.  
Rohiṇī is most certainly the star of fertility & creativity, accompanied by 
passion and beauty. 
Let’s explore who Brahmā is and hear some stories connected with him, 
to better appreciate the fertile creative energy and passion within his 
star, Rohiṇī. 
The God of Creativity 
Hinduism is often portrayed to Christianized audiences as having a 
concept of “trinity” because Indian thought conceives of the world as 
being composed of three basic forces. In truth, however, the Indian 
concept is less like the Christian trinity and more like modern color 
theory, which states that three primary colors combine in various ratios 
to create an infinite spectrum.  

<<<PAGE 26>>>
26 
The three primary forces are sattva, rajas, and tamas.  
Sattva = clarity, light, balance, peace 
 
Rajas = redness, passion, desire, action 
 
Tamas = shadow, darkness, stability, sleep 
These three forces cause three essential universal events: maintenance, 
creation, and destruction. Three extremely powerful beings command 
the three forces and therefore the three universal events. Viṣṇu keeps 
things existing by commanding the force of clarity, sattva. Brahmā 
creates things by commanding the reddening force, rajas. Śiva destroys 
things by commanding the force of shadow, tamas. 
Brahmā is the deity of the reddening power of creation and passion, 
rajas. So he is naturally the deity of the red star Rohiṇī. Rohiṇī is a star 
of rajas: fertility, passion, motivation, and creative powers of all sorts. 
Tale of Creation 
Vedic literature gives us a few different angles on the birth of Brahmā 
and how he created the world.6 I will incorporate all these as I present 
you the Purāṇic tale of creation: 
Before all else, there is consciousness. It is full of inherent joy and bliss.  
Joy is not stagnant. By nature it is ever-amplifying. Amplification implies 
an original signal and a distinct entity to amplify that signal. Plurality is 
therefore inherent in the original singular consciousness. Since joy does 
not thrive in loneliness, an infinite number of beings eternally center 
around the original consciousness.  
Those infinite beings possess freewill, and are free to be non-
cooperative with this scenario. Therefore a mirror image of reality exists, 
                                                          
6 Manusmṛti chapter one and Vāmana Purāṇa chapter 43 use the metaphor of 
an “egg” within an ocean. Vedānta Sūtra adds philosophical dimension to the 
tale. Brahmā Saṁhita also adds details. The Bhāgavata Purāṇa gives context to 
them all in its 1.3, 2.4-5, and 3.8. 

<<<PAGE 27>>>
27 
where the centrality of the original consciousness is hidden in 
“darkness”, and the peripheral spark of freewill can imagine herself to 
be central.   
Into this darkness the original consciousness expands as Puruṣa, the 
original Viṣṇu. Puruṣa reclines there on “the ocean of causes and 
possibilities.”  While partially submerged in the waters an infinite 
number of bubbles exhale from the pores of his body. Some tales 
portray these bubbles as “eggs,” specifically as golden eggs. This is 
because an egg is circular and contains within it the materials and 
energies required to create something new. The egg is golden because it 
glows with conscious power, being a radiation from the divine all-
conscious body of the Puruṣa. These bubble-eggs are the proto-solar-
systems floating in the vast ocean of causality, space. 
Eggs require seeds before they create anything. Therefore the Puruṣa 
penetrates into each of them. Within each egg he again reclines on a 
“cosmic ocean.” While partially submerged in this ocean, some of its 
water collects in his naval, in which a “lotus flower” grows. 
Flowers reproduce asexually, and are therefore a fitting vehicle through 
which to deliver the very first being into the world.7 When the flower at 
the top of that lotus opened its petals, the god of creation Brahmā sat 
upon its central whorl. 
At first Brahmā did not know who he was, what he was supposed to do, 
or how he was supposed to do it. He climbed down the stem of the 
lotus but couldn’t find its end. He looked around in all other directions 
and thus developed five heads (east, west, north, south, and up) – later 
                                                          
7 Because Brahmā was born asexually he is called Aja, “unborn” or “without 
conventional birth.” 

<<<PAGE 28>>>
28 
Śiva removed one of these.8 Yet Brahmā could find no clue to answer 
any of his questions. 
Then the Puruṣa spoke a single word, which Brahmā heard as a voice 
from the vastness of space: “tapa.” This was an instruction to Brahmā, 
“Be still. Control yourself. Be humble. Then you will understand.” 
Brahmā practiced stillness and self-control, and as a result his mind 
became receptive to a full transmission of knowledge from Viṣṇu. In that 
transmission he received everything he needed to know, including the 
blueprint of how to use the primordial energies available within the 
“egg” to assemble all the various forms and creations of the universe. 
Before Brahmā, there was nothing but what we might call subatomic 
quantums. Everything which now exists is a creation of Brahmā or a 
subsequent creation of his creation. 
Let’s stop for a moment to consider how immensely creative Brahmā 
must be. He is the creator of the entire universe, the most creative 
being in it! Perhaps now we can appreciate how his star, Rohiṇī, 
abounds in creative power. 
The Original Father 
Brahmā was born before anyone else, and everyone else was born from 
him (with very few exceptions). Thus an often used name for Brahmā is 
Prajāpati, the original “progenitor.” Brahmā created many other 
prajāpati to help him populate the world, but when Prajāpati is used in a 
singular, specific manner it refers specifically to Brahmā. 
Brahmā created many beings directly from his thoughts, so we should 
know that his star, Rohiṇī, is imaginative and full of creative thoughts 
and ideas. Brahmā also creates in a more conventional manner, so we 
should know that Rohiṇī has strong procreative and romantic passions. 
                                                          
8 Some say that Śiva keeps the fifth skull as a bowl, others say that he threw it 
into space and it landed in Mṛgaśīrṣā. I tell the story in a little more detail in the 
chapter on Ārdrā.  

<<<PAGE 29>>>
29 
Brahmā Marries His Daughter 
Regarding more conventional procreation, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (3.12) 
tells a story too interesting not to mention. For Brahmā to reproduce 
sexually he must first create his own wife. So, in a sense, his wife must 
be his “daughter”. 
Her name is Vāk (the power of speech, another name for Sārasvatī, the 
goddess of learning), and she was not at all into the idea. When Brahmā 
began pressuring her, his other children stopped him in protest. 
Ashamed of himself, Brahmā abandoned his body and created a new 
one, to wash off the impurity of his thoughts. The old body turned into a 
dangerous fog in the darkness. 
Later on Vāk agreed to marry Brahmā, seeing his predicament, but the 
two are not a happy couple and live at a distance from one another. 
Father of Śiva  
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (3.12) describes Śiva as the child of Brahmā.  
Brahmā became furious that his quadruplet sons refused to take up the 
important duty of procreation, in favor of pursuing celibacy for spiritual 
reasons. From between his furrowed eyebrows, Brahmā’s anger sprang 
forth personified as Rudra, who later became known as Śiva.  
I will tell you this story in more detail when we come to Rudra’s star, 
Ārdrā. 
Viṣṇu is the first god because he controls the power of sattva, the 
energy of existence itself. Existence cannot manifest itself, however, 
without creation – so from Viṣṇu comes the god of creativity 
(rajas),Brahmā. However, whatever is created must be destroyed, and 
without destruction (tamas) there is no room for creation. Thus rajas 
always invokes tamas – and therefore the god of tamas (Śiva) emerges 
from the god of rajas (Brahmā). 

<<<PAGE 30>>>
30 
Although Rohiṇī is a beautiful and pleasant star, it, like Brahmā also has 
a brief but hot temper when frustrated.9 
                                                          
9 In classical times Rohiṇī coincided with a significant portion of Taurus. I feel 
this is why this type of hot temper is associated with Taurus in classical 
astrology, even though nothing about Taurus’ ruler (Venus), element (Earth), or 
mode (Fixed) lends itself much towards anger or hot tempers. 

<<<PAGE 31>>>
31 
The Quest ~ Mṛgaśīrṣā 
 
Name
Mṛgaśīrṣā
Meaning
Deer-faced
Symbol
Deer sniffing the ground
Deity
Soma - god of immortal nectar
Main Stars
The head of Orion: λ, φ Orionis
 
 

<<<PAGE 32>>>
32 
Mṛga means a forest animal, especially deer. These animals are so 
named because they constantly roam in search of food; matching the 
literal meaning of the word: “searcher.”  
Mṛgaśīrṣā’s symbol – a deer sniffing the ground – is essentially a literal 
depiction of the word Mṛgaśīrṣā (“Deer’s face”).  
Soma is the deity of Mṛgaśīrṣā. Soma comes up in Bhagavad-Gītā (15.13), 
when Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, 
puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ 
“I become Soma and make plants delicious and nourishing.” 
Soma is the god of a legendary elixir (also named Soma) that grants 
eternal youth and unsurpassed delight. I think it is simplest to describe 
Soma as the “fountain of youth.” This ties in nicely with the nature of 
Mṛgaśīrṣā to inspire quests and searches. 
Literally, the word soma means “juice, sap, liquid.” Specifically, it is the 
liquid within plants that makes them nourishing and delicious. 
Nourishment keeps us young, deliciousness delights us; so all food is a 
type of Soma. The legendary elixir is simply the ultimate form of food.  
Vedic lore singles out one plant with the name soma-vallī, for it excels 
all others in nutrition and flavor. It is now extinct, but they say that 
millennia ago it grew in a few specific areas,10 and its leaves blossomed 
and withered with the waxing and waning Moon. By pressing the juice 
from its stalks one could make a beverage called Soma or Amṛta – the 
“nectar of immortality,” which the gods copiously drink to become 
powerful and impossible to kill. 
                                                          
10 Ṛg 8.7.29 & 8.64.10-11 say it grew in “Sushoma, Arjikiya, etc.” and in 
“Sharanyavat” (which is probably the shore of a specific lake) and on the slopes 
of Mt. Mūjavat. It is said to have a long, grassy-colored stalk and a green 
brilliance (Ṛg 9.42.1 & 9.61.17). 

<<<PAGE 33>>>
33 
All vegetable-food carries the power of life in it. So in a sense, all food is 
amṛta. If we don’t eat, we die (mṛta). If we eat, we don’t die (a-mṛta). 
All food makes us “immortal” because it counteracts mortality. But the 
elixir made from the Soma plant is a super-food of legendary power. 
Humans and gods alike from all ages and cultures eternally search for it, 
like deer sniffing out its trail. 
The deer of Mṛgaśīrṣā sniffs the ground in search of Soma in healthy and 
delicious herbs, but the human spirit sniffs at the paths of life in search 
of Soma in the form of eternality and bliss.  
Mṛgaśīrṣā is all about searching.  
Soma, Amṛta, Rasa 
I mentioned that foods, among which Soma is the emperor, have two 
qualities: they keep us alive, and give us pleasure.  Ṛg Veda (9), a section 
entirely dedicated to Soma, confirms this, saying that Soma (1) gives 
immortality, and (2) “roars”. 
Soma is also called Amṛta (“imortality”) because it counteracts mortality, 
food keeps us alive. Ṛg 9.42 goes so far to calls Soma the “immortality of 
the immortals” and the “godhood within the gods.”  
The second quality of Soma, however, is even more interesting. Sure, 
staying alive is important, but what is the point of living? Ṛg 9 presents 
Soma to us as an answer: the point of living is to enjoy, to “roar,” to 
revel and enjoy; to taste rasa – ecstatic joy. Thus another synonym for 
Soma is Rasa. 
Taittiriya Upanishad (Ananda.7) speaks of rasa:  
raso vai saḥ  
rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati 
“He is certainly rasa itself! 
Attain his rasa and become undoubtedly intoxicated with bliss!” 

<<<PAGE 34>>>
34 
Directly or indirectly, consciously or not, we are all on a quest seeking 
rasa. Our ambition may be smashed into a lower, smaller shape by the 
hammer of repeated failure, but rasa is the real thirst behind every 
desire. Mṛgaśīrṣā involves all permutations of the search for rasa, not 
merely base and simple fun-seeking. After all, a deer is a beautiful and 
graceful creature, not a brute. 
Rasa is the highest objective of Mṛgaśīrṣā. The Upanishad tells us that 
we will not find rasa in its fullest form in any fruit or vegetable, nor even 
in any paradisiacal elixir. We find it in sah - the All-Attractive Godhead, 
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is rasa personified. 
Siblings in the Stars 
Mahābhārata (Vana.221.15) tells us that Soma’s brother is Agñi, and his 
sister is Rohiṇī. This is has significant astrological import. The two 
brothers, Soma and Agñi stand on both sides of their sister. To one side 
of Rohiṇī is Soma’s star, Mṛgaśīrṣā. To the other side is Agñi’s star, 
Kṛttikā. 
Agñi is the solar principle, fire. Soma is the lunar principle, water. Life 
thrives best when heat and moisture combine. Rohiṇī, between the 
heat of Agñi and moisture of Soma, is therefore the most abundant and 
fertile location among the 27 stars.11 
 
                                                          
11 This is similar to the famous “Juggernaut” deities of Orissa: Like Rohiṇī, the 
golden sister, Subhadrā, is protected on both sides by her brothers. On her 
right is Bāladeva, bright like the sunlit day (similar to Agni). On her left is 
Jagannātha, dark like the moonlit night (similar to Soma).  
 

<<<PAGE 35>>>
35 
The Storm ~ Ārdrā  
 
Name
Ārdrā
Meaning
Soaked
Symbol
Storms; Raindrops
Deity
Rudra - god of storms
Main Star
Betelgeuse
 

<<<PAGE 36>>>
36 
The word ārdrā literally means “wet.” Wet things symbolize Ārdrā: 
teardrops, raindrops, and especially storms. Rudra, the howling god of 
destructive storms, is Ārdrā’s deity.  
What is a Storm? It is frightening, terrible and destructive, but it is 
nature’s way of replenishing the clean oxygen and protective ozone in 
the atmosphere.  
Ārdrā is the storm that we must weather so that our nature can 
once again become pure and clean. 
Śankara-ācārya, an incarnation of Rudra, was born when the Moon was 
in Ārdrā. The next great philosopher of India, Rāmānujā-ācārya, who 
corrected and built upon the foundations laid by Śankara, was also born 
with the moon in Ārdrā.  
Clearly, this star is a spiritually fertile domain. 
The Creator and Destroyer Fight 
The Skanda Purāṇa says that Brahmā once had an argument with Rudra, 
during which Rudra decapitated one of Brahmā’s heads (originally he 
had five). Rudra threw the head into space, and it became the stars of 
Mṛgaśīrṣā, the nakṣatra which comes after Brahmā’s Rohiṇī. Searching 
(mṛga) for the head (śirṣa), Rudra came to reside in the nakṣatra next to 
Mṛgaśīrṣā, Ārdrā. 
If we postulate that the “u” has simply been dropped from the modern 
spelling of Ārdrā, the name of this star simply means the place that 
attracted Rudra. In fact it is not uncommon to see the name of this star 
spelled “Ārudrā.” 

<<<PAGE 37>>>
37 
Anger & Destruction 
The birth of Rudra, god of Ārdrā, is described in many places with some 
variation.12 Here is a compilation of the tale: 
After Brahmā had created the major components of the universe, he 
needed to create living beings to populate it. First he generated four 
wonderful beings and said to them, “Populate the universe!”, but they 
refused. They were completely uninterested in working within the 
material world, because their ambitions were purely spiritual. Brahmā 
became extremely angry that his first children would disobey him. Yet 
he also knew that their reason for rejecting his wish was valid.  
So he tried to control his anger, but it built up behind his eyebrows, 
which formed more and more drastically into a profound scowl. The 
power of his fury caused them to begin to glow. It became so intense 
that Brahmā could no longer hold it back. Instead of expressing it upon 
his saintly sons, he cast the anger out from his forehead and it became a 
dark purplish child who wailed and howled furiously.  
“Who am I?” it demanded to know. 
“You are Rudra (The Wailer, The Howler)!” declared Brahmā. 
The child was half male and half female, so Brahmā said, “Be split!” 
Rudra and his wife Rudrānī then took separate forms. 
 “Again split!” declared Brahmā.  
Then, Rudra and Rudrāṇī each split into eleven forms of themselves. 
“Now, go to your rightful places and create offspring!” declared Brahmā. 
So they did; Fierce, angry, howling creatures of fire, storm, and 
destruction they created by the thousands. 
                                                          
12 Bhāgavata Purāṇa 3.12; Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.7 & 8; Devī Bhāgavat 7; 
Mahābhārata Vana.12. 

<<<PAGE 38>>>
38 
Seeing this Brahmā cried, “Dear children, please stop! Destruction must 
be balanced, measured and contained. It cannot proliferate without 
limit. Instead of creating more inauspicious beings, go now and 
meditate upon Godhead. This will calm you and make you auspicious.” 
The eleven Rudra and Rudrāṇī consolidated themselves into a single 
male and female and followed Brahmā’s order. By so doing Rudra and 
Rudrāṇī became auspicious, and so received the names Śiva (“He Who is 
Auspicious”), and Pārvatī (“She Who has Risen Higher”). 
Rudra was born when Brahmā’s creative ambitions were 
frustrated. Ārdrā is the frustration of creativity. It represents all 
the things we must overcome before we can create and attain 
our desired objectives. 
Rudra brings destruction, which can easily become 
overwhelming, but which also serves a purpose. Ārdrā 
empowers humanity to destroy, forget, and let go of 
inauspicious things. 
The Necessity of Destruction 
Rudra’s role in the universe is Ārdrā’s role in our lives: destruction. We 
need destruction because without it there is no space for creation.  
The creator, Brahmā, lives for trillions of years, and each of his “days” 
lasts for millions and millions of human years. The creator cannot rest 
while his creations are active. Rudra and his children have to begin 
dismantling the creation before brahma can rest. If Rudra did not 
perform his role of destruction, Brahmā could not rest and restore his 
creative energy.  
Ārdrā allows us to rest. When things need to “rest in peace” they 
need Ārdrā.  
Iśa Upanishad (11) tells us that this unlearning (destruction) is just as 
important as learning (creation). 

<<<PAGE 39>>>
39 
Ārdrā allows us to unlearn, to destroy ignorance and forget 
what should be forgotten.  
Protector of Divine Rasa 
Residents of the holy city of Vṛṇdāvana tell a sacred legend of Śiva as 
“Gopeśvara Mahādeva.” This tale beautifully illustrates how destruction 
of the unreal and utter forgetfulness and abandonment of one’s illusory 
ego is required before one can enter into the true beauty and pleasure 
of spiritual abundance. It reflects in the order of the stars. Rohiṇī is 
central, representing the blessed objective of beauty and fertility. It is 
nourished on both sides by the solar force of Agñi’s Kṛttikā and the lunar 
force of Soma’s Mṛgaśīrṣā. Then it is bracketed on both sides by the 
difficult walls of Yama’s Bharaṇī and Rudra’s Ārdrā. Here is a tale of how 
the god of Ārdrā holds the key to entrance past these walls and into the 
blessed realm. 
In the middle of the full-moon-lit autumn night, Śrī Kṛṣṇa held the 
magñificent “dance of rāsa,” manifesting infinite romantic beauty. Śiva 
rushed to the spot to participate, but Vṛṇdā, the goddess of Vṛṇdāvana, 
stopped him in his tracks at the outskirts of the forest groves. “You are 
not permitted to enter!” She declared. 
Śiva was crushed and dejected. “Why!?” 
“No men enter here besides Kṛṣṇa,” Vṛṇdā explained. “Because you 
hold on to the false-identity of being a male, your presence cannot be 
tolerated!”  
From a great distance, Śiva could hear and see and smell and feel the 
excitement of the rāsa-dance. This drove him mad with desire.  
“I am Rudra!!!” He declared. “I can destroy everything!!! Therefore I will 
destroy my own male ego!” With this ferociously powerful 
determination he entered meditation upon the supreme female, Śrī 
Rādhā, the central figure of the rāsa-dance, seeking her blessing. 

<<<PAGE 40>>>
40 
Hearing his prayers, Śrī Rādhā sent her closest confidant, Lalitā, to Śiva, 
who sat in fiery, passionate meditation at the edge of the forest. Lalitā 
imparted to Śiva all the profound conceptions required to develop the 
inner ego of a purely feminine goddess fit to partake in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s 
paramount revelry of rāsa. Yet Śiva’s male body remained. 
Lalitā escorted him to the Yamunā. By her blessing, when Śiva again 
emerged from the water he possessed a new physical self to match his 
new internal self: he had the form of a divine goddess of rāsa, a Gopī. 
When Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw this new gopī entering the rāsa-dance hand in hand 
with Lalitā a surge of happiness and mischief erupted from his 
transcendental being. Because this gopī was none other than Śiva (who 
is called Maheśvara, the great controller) Kṛṣṇa playfully nicknamed her 
Gopeśvara. 
Today, pilgrims to Vṛṇdāvana seeking to eventually participate in Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa’s divine Rāsa dance always pray to Śiva as Gopeśvara. Their prayer 
is that Rudra will destroy the ego that makes them unqualified to 
participate in such divine bliss. 
When the destructive force of Ārdrā is given spiritual direction, it 
dismantles the false ego and allows one entry into blessed 
realms of being. 

<<<PAGE 41>>>
41 
Repeating Patterns ~ Punarvasu 
 
Name
Punarvasu
Meaning
Reignition
Symbol
An arrow returned to the quiver
Deity
Aditi – the universal mother
Main Stars
Heads of the twins: Castor and Pollux
 

<<<PAGE 42>>>
42 
 
Punar means again. Vasu means bright. So the word Punarvasu can 
mean, “Becoming bright again” (Reignition). Punarvasu is about things 
happening again; Things happening within other things, within 
themselves; in cycles; in repetition.  
A fractal – an image formed by a pattern repeating itself within itself – is 
an excellent symbol for Punarvasu. The classical symbol is an arrow put 
back into a quiver after it has been shot.  
Mother of her own Father 
Here is an example of fractal patterns within patterns: The goddess of 
Punarvasu is Aditi – who is the mother of her own father. Aditi is the 
fabric of space itself, so she is the raw material Brahmā draws upon for 
creation. Thus, she is the real “mother” of Brahmā’s children, including 
her own father Dakṣa. She helped create Dakṣa, and later she took 
shape in the world by being born as his daughter. The son comes from 
the mother, and then the mother comes from the son.  
Thus Ṛg Veda (10.72.4) says: “Aditi comes from Dakṣa, but Dakṣa comes 
from Aditi.”  
Boundless Unity 
The name Aditi literally means boundless. She is the fabric of space itself, 
the boundless matrix within which everything else exists. Because space 
is the womb within which all live develops, she is the “universal mother.” 
Especially the “vasu” – the luminous gods – are all her children.  
To be boundless means to have no boundaries, to be whole, unbroken 
and undivided. The goddess of non-division is the mother of the gods. 
Her sister’s name is Diti, which means divided. This goddess of division is 
the mother of the anti-gods. The idea emerges that unity is a godly 
principle, while division is ungodly. Things that unite have godly effects, 
while things that divide have ungodly effects.  

<<<PAGE 43>>>
43 
Aditi’s Punarvasu empowers humanity to work cooperatively, 
become unified; to come together and form a larger pattern 
within larger patterns. 
Aditi is not only the mother of the gods, but she is also the mother of 
the original Godhead when He appears tangibly within this universe as 
an avatār (“incarnation”). This is another example of fractal patterns, 
Aditi comes from Godhead, but Godhead comes from Aditi. 
Mother of God 
The concept of being the Mother of a being that has no origin and is the 
origin of everything is another perfect example of the fractal patterns-
within-patterns that symbolizes Punarvasu. 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (8.16-18) describes how Aditi became the mother 
of existence itself, Viṣṇu: 
A powerful demon named Bali conquered all the worlds and the gods 
lost all power. Aditi requested her husband Kaśyapa to give her a son 
who could save them.  Kaśyapa told her how to perform a ritual for this 
purpose. But since Aditi knew that only Godhead could save the gods 
from this situation, her performance of this ritual attracted God to 
become her child.  
When the ritual was complete, Godhead appeared and assured her, “I 
will become your son, but this situation cannot be remedied by force. I 
will come up with a different strategy.” 
Aditi then conceived a child with Kaśyapa, who was born mysteriously 
as the Godhead Viṣṇu – blackish with glittering yellow clothes, four 
armed and gloriously beautiful. Before their very eyes, He transformed 
into a very small boy; a student-mendicant, named Vāmana.  
Viṣṇu thus became the younger brother of Aditi’s first child, Indra. The 
young boy soon set off to where Bali was performing an elaborate ritual 
to celebrate his victory over the gods. When he entered the arena, 
everyone was struck with his beauty and effulgence and greeted him 

<<<PAGE 44>>>
44 
with warm respects. Bali, especially, was charmed by the endearing 
beauty of Vāmana.  
“It is my great fortune that such a wondrous spiritualist has come to my 
palace! The opportunity to serve you will free me from all the sins of my 
selfish life. You must have come here to ask something from me, please 
ask it! I will happily give you any wealth or pleasure you desire!” 
Vāmana was very pleased with Bali’s humble and spiritually informed 
attitude. He said to Bali, “You are wonderful because you have good 
teachers and because your grandfather is the great Prahlād. You are as 
great and dear to me as your grandfather! But I do not need any wealth 
or pleasures. It is not good for a spiritualist to accept such things. I just 
want whatever land I can claim for myself in three paces.” 
Bali replied, “You are wise beyond your years, but still inexperienced. 
You should take what you can get when it is offered!  I own even the 
heavens. I can give you anything. Someone who asks a favor from me 
should never have to ask another person for a favor again! So why 
should you only take three paces of land? It would defame me to give 
such a petty gift!” 
Vāmana replied, “If a person can’t be satisfied with three steps of land, 
he won’t be satisfied with the three worlds. Self-control makes one 
happy. Feeding uncontrolled desire causes misery.” 
Smiling, Bali said, “Alright, then. You are very wise. I shall happily give 
you what you request.” With that he took up his waterpot to wash his 
palm in a gesture of solemn promise, but no water would flow from it. 
When Bali used a straw to unblock the nozzle, Śukra (the deity of Venus 
and Bali’s guru) suddenly appeared, holding his eye in pain. He had 
taken a tiny form and purposely clogged the pot, and the straw had 
poked out his eye. 
Śukra said, “This little boy is Viṣṇu! He has been born to Aditi to protect 
her children, the gods. You’ve gone and promised to give him land!? He 
will take everything from you and give it to your enemy, Indra! You fool! 

<<<PAGE 45>>>
45 
You will be homeless!!! He will take the entire universe in just two steps 
and make you unable to fulfill your promise, and thus send you to hell! 
Charity is good, up to a point! Besides, you did not say “Om” when 
making this promise to give him land, so it is not binding!” 
Bali thought about this deeply for a few moments. Then he said, 
“Mother Earth said, ‘I can bear any burden, but I cannot bear a liar.’ 
Truthfulness is the soul of morality, without which there can be no good 
fortune. I don’t mind losing my riches, so long as I do not lose my 
morality.” 
Śukra was infuriated. “You think you know morality better than I do!? So 
be it, then! Become penniless!!!” Śukra then disappeared.  
Bali did not mind this in the least. He very happily worshipped the young 
spiritualist with all respect and offered him to take the land he desired.  
Vāmana then began to grow to huge proportions, revealing that he was 
all-pervading Viṣṇu. Bali could see the entire universe within his “body.” 
Here is another instance of fractal patterns-within-patterns: Vāmana 
was standing within the universe, yet the entire universe existed within 
Vāmana.  
With one step the huge Viṣṇu covered all of normal earthly space. With 
the second he reached the highest extent of the heavens.  
The anti-gods rushed forward to kill Viṣṇu, but Viṣṇu’s associates 
appeared and drove them back effortlessly into subterranean regions.  
Viṣṇu’s eagle, Garuda, then arrested Bali and tied him in ropes. Vāmana 
said to Bali, “You promised me three steps of land, but I have taken 
everything you possess and more, in just two steps. Since you cannot 
fulfill your boastful promise, you must enter the hells.” 
Bali replied, “That is no problem. Your punishment is always just. We 
anti-gods always want power and prestige. When you punish us it is 
kind because it opens our eyes to a more blissful reality that we are not 
all-powerful, we are but fragments of your energy and should endeavor 

<<<PAGE 46>>>
46 
only to serve your desires! Everything you have taken from me is a 
blessing. What is the use of material prosperity? It only puts one into 
deeper spiritual ignorance!  But I do not wish to be untruthful.  I have 
offered you three steps of property. I owned the three worlds, which 
you took in just two steps. Surely the owner of land is even more 
valuable than the land itself, so I must be worth at least two steps. 
Please place your third step on my head and claim me as your servant. 
This will fulfill my promise.” 
Thrilled by the unwavering devotion of this great soul amidst demons, 
Viṣṇu declared, “Because your devotion for me is so pure that you were 
willing to happily surrender everything, I will give you something greater 
than even the gods possess! In the future you will become the king of 
the Gods. Until then you can live on a special planet called Sutala, free 
from the influence of time and decay. No one will be able to conquer 
you. I will protect you always and will personally stay there with you as 
your gatekeeper.” 
Budha Curses Aditi 
Mahābhārata (Śānti.34.96-98): 
Budha (the god of Mercury) came to Aditi’s home hungry. She was at 
the end of feeding her children, so she asked him to wait a moment. 
Budha became upset over this transgression of etiquette and cursed her, 
“You so love your children!? Then become Vivasvān’s mother a second 
time!” Vivasvān was reborn to Aditi as Aṇḍa and his fiery heat caused 
her great pain during pregnancy.  
This serves as another illustration of repetition, the main theme of 
Punarvasu. 
Rebirths of Aditi 
Aditi herself has many rebirths, just as a fractal appears many times 
within itself. All of them center on being the mother facilitating the birth 
of Godhead. Mahābhārata (Śānti.43.6) says that Viṣṇu is born seven 
times to Aditi. This repetition is interesting to the study of Punarvasu. 

<<<PAGE 47>>>
47 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (10.3) says that Aditi was once Pṛśṇi, the wife of a 
different son of Brahmā, named Sutapas. She performed great 
austerities in devotion to Viṣṇu for 12,000 years. When Viṣṇu appeared 
to grant her wishes, she wished that he would become her son, which 
he did. 
Kṛṣṇa told this story to his mother, to let her know that she and he are 
always mother and son, repeatedly. Thus Kṛṣṇa’s mother, Devakī is yet 
another incarnation of Aditi. 
The story behind Aditi becoming Devakī is also fascinating. It is told in 
Devī Bhāgavata (4): Aditi was the first wife of Kaśyapa, and she gave 
birth to the gods, headed by Indra. Her sister, Diti, the second wife, was 
jealous and asked Kaśyapa for children who would be equals to the gods. 
Thus eventually she gave birth to the anti-gods (“demons”). But Aditi 
became fearful and sent her child to destroy the first child in her sister’s 
womb. Diti then cursed Aditi: “Your child will repeatedly lose his 
kingdom to my children! And you will lose your children!” 
The first part of the curse is constantly being fulfilled as Diti’s children, 
the anti-gods, attempt to conquer the gods, and often succeed. The 
second part of the curse was fulfilled when Aditi became Devakī, who 
had to suffer the loss of many children at the hands of her atrocious 
brother Kaṁsa. 

<<<PAGE 48>>>
48 
The Highest Blossom ~ Puṣya 
 
Name
Puṣya
Meaning
Flowering
Symbol
Lotus
Deity
Bṛhaspati - god of prayer
Main Stars
γ, δ (Asellus Australis) and θ Cancri.
 

<<<PAGE 49>>>
49 
 
The word puṣya has two primary meanings: 
1. The top/best part of a thing; usually referring to a flower, the 
top and best part of a plant.  
2. Nourishment; which allows us to blossom and grow. 
There is a motherly, loving and devotional overtone to the word puṣya. 
Love, after all, is the topmost blossom on the flower of life. 
Puṣya’s primary symbol is a lotus, the most beautiful and wholesome 
flower. The udders of a cow are sometimes used to symbolize Puṣya; 
conveying the theme of nourishment.  
Bṛhaspati, the god of prayer and devotions, is the deity of Puṣya. In 
Bhagavad Gītā (10.24), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: 
purodhasāṁ ca mukhyaṁ māṁ viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim 
“Among the best priests, know me to be Bṛhaspati.” 
Among all priests, Bṛhaspati is the best. A priest is a person who 
facilitates our connection to the divine. Prayer is an interactive union 
with the divine. Bṛhaspati is the god who masterfully conducts religious 
rituals and prayers – the technologies of divine communion.  
Puṣya is always thought of as being among the most fortunate and 
prosperous of Vedic stars. Other names for Puṣya are Sidhya (“perfect”) 
and Tiṣya (“auspicious”). Why? What is the connection between 
devotional prayer and prosperity? 
In Gītā (10.38) Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: 
nītir asmi jigīṣatām 
“For those whose desire victory, I am morality.” 

<<<PAGE 50>>>
50 
Puṣya is a successful and prosperous star because it facilitated 
communion with the divine, which engenders morality, which leads to 
true victory and prosperity.  
What is morality? It is what distinguishes “right” from “wrong.” Right 
and wrong, though, are not absolute. What is right in one circumstance 
is wrong in another. It might be wrong to use a knife to kill someone, 
yet right to use the same knife for slicing bread. It might be wrong to kill 
someone, but right to kill someone who is on the brink of killing many 
other people. Morality is relative. And that’s why it’s complicated. 
We can’t really be morally strong without understanding moral 
relativity: knowing how to apply a moral principle in many different 
circumstances. This requires serious contemplation, reflection, and 
depth. Bṛhaspati is facilitates all these things: contemplation, meditation, 
prayer; and by doing so he strengthens real morality, and thus causes us 
to be more victorious and prosperous.  
Through Puṣya, Bṛhaspati empowers human beings to commune 
with deeper principles. This strengthens morality and causes 
prosperity and victory. It eventually leads to selfless devotional 
intimacy with the divine.  
The Son of the Sage of Fire 
Ṛg Veda (4.40.1) and Mahābhārata (Adi.66) clearly state that Bṛhaspati 
is the son of Angiras. Angiras is Brahmā’s son, was born from the coals 
of a fire.  He is therefore a fire-sage. His son, Bṛhaspati is sometimes 
called “the son of fire,” but this doesn’t mean Bṛhaspati is the son of 
Agñi, the fire god.  
From his father Bṛhaspati inherits affinity and skill with fire. Fire is 
symbolic of religion and morality because the light of fire shows us the 
correct path, and the warmth of fire nourishes us. Fire is the focal point 
of most religious rituals, especially Vedic, because it transforms things. 
It transforms matter to energy, thus allowing sacrifices to be delivered 
to the gods.  

<<<PAGE 51>>>
51 
Bṛhaspati’s mother is named Śraddhā, which means trust, faith, and 
confidence. The god of communion with the divine is born from trust, 
faith, and confidence.  
Puṣya encourages faith and devotion. 
Priest and Guru of the Gods 
Bṛhaspati was very religiously inclined from birth and therefore went to 
a sacred place to commune with the divine. Śiva was very impressed 
with the boy and granted him the position of the priest and guru of all 
the gods, and gave him custodianship of the astrological planet Jupiter.  
Much of what an astrologer knows as the traits of Jupiter can 
therefore be transposed into Puṣya. You can think of Puṣya as if 
it was Jupiter as a star: It is very positive, helpful, nurturing, and 
allows things to grow, develop, prosper and blossom in a moral 
and wholesome manner. 
Milking the Earth 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (4.17-18) tells a story which ties into using the 
udders of a cow as Puṣya’s symbol: 
Once upon a time, the Earth became very weak and there was extreme 
famine. Godhead empowered a king named Pṛthu to remedy the 
situation. The king took up a bow and threatened the Earth, “you must 
produce!” 
The Earth-goddess in her form as a cow fled as fast as she could, but she 
could not escape the king. Submitting to him, she explained why she 
had been causing famine, “No one takes care of me anymore. They just 
take as much as they can from me, and do not even use my bounty to 
worship Godhead! Therefore I have made my surface rocky and hilly, so 
that the water cannot enrich the soil and nothing will grow. But I submit 
to you now to change this situation! Bring me a calf. The milk I then give 
will restore everything I have withheld.” 

<<<PAGE 52>>>
52 
First the king made the chief of humanity (Svāyambhuva Manu) into a 
“calf” and obtained as “milk” all the grains and vegetables needed to 
feed the citizens. Then various groups used various people as “calves,” 
and through those calves they got all they desired from the Earth. The 
first group to do so was the sages. They selected Bṛhaspati to become 
the calf, and through him obtained “milk” from the Earth in the form of 
mantras and hymns that would make the mind clean and pure. 
Punishing the King of the Gods 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (6.7) tells how Bṛhaspati punished Indra, the king of 
the gods: 
Once, Indra was enjoying very opulently and luxuriantly in his regal 
assembly hall, surrounded by beautiful and influential admirers and his 
extremely beautiful queen. Bṛhaspati entered and Indra neglected to 
stop his revelry to welcome his priest and guru. 
Seeing Indra reeking of the typical egoistic pollution that accompanies 
material enjoyment, Bṛhaspati simply turned around and left. 
When the doors closed behind his departing guru, Indra suddenly 
realized his error and went in search of him to apologize. But Bṛhaspati 
wanted to teach Indra an important lesson, so he became invisible. 
The anti-gods heard news that the gods were without their guide and 
priest, and so they attacked the heavens. They severely wounded the 
gods and brought them to the brink of total defeat.  
This illustrates that without Puṣya we cannot be successful. 
Being “without Puṣya” means losing our unity with the divine. 
Ego destroys this union. Thus, when fouled by the ego of power 
and luxury we, like Indra, lose access to divine communion, and 
all the blossoms of our prosperity wither.  
This story of Indra and Bṛhaspati will continue through many of the rest 
of the stars. 

<<<PAGE 53>>>
53 
Serpentine Embrace ~ Āśleṣā  
 
Name
Āśleṣā
Meaning
Embrace
Symbol
Coiled serpent
Deity
Nāga – the dragons
Main Stars
The head of the hydra: δ, ε, η, ρ, σ Hydrae
 

<<<PAGE 54>>>
54 
The word āśleṣā means, “intimate connection, intimate contact, 
embracing, entwining, adhering, and clinging.” A coiled serpent is a 
fitting symbol for Āśleṣā, because serpents coil around things: 
embracing and entwining with them.  
Āśleṣā’s deity is the “Nāga” – supernatural serpents, a.k.a. “dragons.”  
Like all serpents they have scales, forked tongues and powerful poisons. 
Unlike most serpents Nāga can combust their spit poisons, usually have 
many heads, have super-human intellect and talent, and can shape-shift 
in and out of humanoid and intermediate forms. They are protectors of 
vast treasures. 
Sometimes, ordinary snakes (particularly the King Cobra) can be called 
“nāga” as an honorific. All snakes are connected to Āśleṣā, but the 
deities of Āśleṣā are the supernatural dragons, not ordinary serpents.  
Rivalry and Jealousy 
I’ll tell you a story about the origin of the Nāga.  
One of the sons of Brahmā is Marīci. His son is Kaśyapa, the “genetic 
engineer of the universe.” Kaśyapa married 13 sisters. With each wife 
he produced different species of offspring, from gods to insects. 
According to Mahābhārata (Adi.16), one wife, Kadru, wanted to have 
many, many children; while another wife, Vinata, desired only two very 
powerful children. Kadru laid 1000 eggs which quickly hatched into so 
many different varieties of serpents, the foremost of whom were the 
Nāga. Vinata laid two eggs which took a very long time to hatch. One of 
the children became Aruṇa, who drives the chariot of the Sun and 
shields the world from the fury of his heat. The other was the gigantic 
King of Eagles, Garuḍa, who became the associate and carrier of Viṣṇu. 
Kadru was jealous of the power her husband allotted to her sister’s two 
children, and devised a plan to ruin her. She made a bet: “I bet you that 
the color of the tail of the divine horse that emerged from the ocean of 
milk is not white! If I am right, you and your children are my slaves. If 

<<<PAGE 55>>>
55 
you are right, my children and I are your slaves.” Kadru, however, rigged 
the bet, by asking her black serpent children to mix into the hair of the 
horse’s tail.  The serpents who refused their mother’s request on moral 
grounds became a separate, special branch of the Nāga race. The rest of 
the serpents mixed into the hair, making it appear black. Vinata thus 
lost the bet and became a servant of Kadru.  
It was then that Garuḍa hatched from his egg, born into slavery. He 
submitted but developed hatred of the serpents as a result. Eventually, 
he asked the Nāga, “How can I be released of this debt to you?”  
“Bring us soma, the nectar of immortality!” They replied. 
Garuḍa “stole” soma from the Gods, but conspired with their king, Indra, 
so that Indra reclaimed the soma before the serpents had a chance to 
drink it. Garuḍa was freed from servitude the moment he placed the 
nectar before the Nāga. As Indra appeared from out of nowhere to 
snatch back the elixir, drops of it splashed onto the kuśa grass, which is 
sharp like a razor blade. The Nāga became very powerful by licking up 
these drops, but also split their tongues on the sharp grass in the 
process. 
Āśleṣā has an inherent weakness towards deception and 
jealousy, owing to the fact that its deity was born into such an 
environment. 
Pleasures beyond Paradise 
The Nāga inhabit and control a unique realm of the universe: “Nāga-
Realm,” the deepest of the seven netherworlds. Because they dwell at 
the very bottom of the physical dimensions, we hear in Mahābhārata 
(Adi.36) that they, “hold the earthly realm aloft upon their hoods.” Thus 
the Nāga are very strong and can hold things better than any other 
creatures. The very word āśleṣā implies this! One can think of the boa 
constrictor or python as a concrete example of a serpent’s power to 
embrace and hold. 

<<<PAGE 56>>>
56 
Āśleṣā empowers humanity to embrace strong attachments and 
affections with enduring emotion and desire. Thus Āśleṣā also 
promotes the ability to bear great weights and responsibilities 
towards those we love. 
The Nāga’s netherworld is not similar to Judeo-Christian hell. It is a place 
of grandeur and pleasure, not a place of punishment.  Chapter 5 of 
Viṣṇu Purāṇa describes it: It is more beautiful than heaven, full of 
radiant jewels, exotic groves and lakes, and breathtaking serpentine 
maidens eager to enjoy! The air carries sweet scents and music. The 
ground is multicolored, soft and mixed with jewels and gold. 
The 24th Chapter of the 5th section of Bhāgavata Purāṇa concurs, adding 
that this world is like a luxurious resort, free from infections, fatigue, 
and aging. The Sun and other luminaries cannot shine into these nether 
regions. The entire world is lit instead by the brilliance held within 
fantastic gems that the residents wear, often as crown-jewels on their 
serpentine hoods. 
The Viṣṇu Purāṇa states that the Nāga are extremely influential 
throughout all seven of the nether realms. Vāyu Purāṇa lists the specific 
Nāga who predominate each nether realm: Kāliya, Takṣaka, Hemaka, 
Vainateya, Kirmira, and Vāsuki. The Bhāgavatam clarifies that the fifth 
and seventh nether-realms particularly belong to the Nāga. The seventh 
realm is the home to the most powerful and impressive of the Nāga, 
headed by their king, Vāsuki. 
Through Āśleṣā, the Nāga empower human beings to obtain 
luxury, and embrace sensual pleasure and enjoyment via 
charisma, charm, mystique, and cunning. 
Vāsuki – King of Dragons 
In Bhagavad-Gita (10.28), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: 
sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ 
“Among serpents I am Vāsuki.” 

<<<PAGE 57>>>
57 
The most celebrated tale involving Vāsuki involves how the gods and 
anti-gods produced the original nectar of immortality by churning the 
cosmic ocean of milk.  
Churning a bucket of milk will make a person tired, and churning an 
entire ocean was a feat even for the gods to accomplish. They needed 
enormous apparatus like continents to stand on and mountains to 
churn with. The rope to turn this mountainous churning rod would have 
to be fantastically strong and long. Everyone agreed that the king of 
serpents, Vāsuki would be the only being that could act as the rope.  
Vāsuki, however, was far off in the deepest netherworld. Garuḍa, proud 
of his ability to carry away snakes in his beak, stepped forward and 
announced that he would bring Vāsuki. When he arrived and explained 
the situation, Vāsuki replied, “If it’s so urgent, carry me to the spot at 
once.” 
Garuḍa, however, could not lift Vāsuki off the ground. Thus he returned 
to the gods empty handed. Śiva then extended his hand to the 
netherworld and Vāsuki wrapped himself around Śiva’s wrist like a 
bracelet. 
Thereafter, Vāsuki firmly embraced the mountain in the middle of the 
ocean and the gods and anti-gods could successfully churn the cosmic 
milk. 
Vāsuki cooperated happily with Śiva but embarrassed haughty 
Garuḍa. It is said that snakes are enemies of common people, 
but they never harm a saint13. Similarly Āśleṣā interests us in 
using our charms and charismas to enjoy life, but it also makes 
us favorable to the truly godly.  
                                                          
13 For example: Buddha is often depicted with an umbrella of hooded snakes 
protecting him. Viṣṇu is almost always depicted in this way. Śiva is always 
adorned with serpents.  

<<<PAGE 58>>>
58 
Śeṣa – The Spiritual Serpent 
In Bhagavad Gita (10.29) Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: 
anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ 
“Among the Nāga I am Ananta.” 
In the previous verse of Gita, Kṛṣṇa said that among serpents he is 
Vāsuki, now he says that among Nāga he is Śeṣa. This indicates that 
Śeṣa is the truest Nāga, distinguished most fully from his serpentine kin. 
In comparison to Śeṣa even the great dragon Vāsuki seems like a snake. 
Still, Vāsuki became the king of the Nāga because Śeṣa had no interest 
in taking the position. Displeased by the sensual orientation of his kin, 
Śeṣa prefers to be solitary and remain apart from them.  Instead Śeṣa 
takes up an intimate relationship with Viṣṇu.  
When Viṣṇu lies upon the cosmic ocean of causality, Śeṣa appears and 
folds his coils into a soft bed for Viṣṇu, while spreading his thousands of 
hoods above him like an umbrella. 
Viṣṇu has Garuḍa the eagle as his carrier, and Śeṣa the serpent as his 
bed. The two, eagles and serpents, should be sworn enemies. But the 
influence of Viṣṇu is so pacifying and pleasant that even deadly enemies 
give up their mutual hatred and cooperate happily to serve him. 
Śeṣa has so many heads they are essentially infinite. This is one reason 
why he also bears the name Ananta, which means endless. 
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (10.1.14) explains that Śeṣa is an incarnation of 
Viṣṇu, who returns to his original form as Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother, 
Balarāma. Śeṣa’s role is always to support and guard Viṣṇu. When Viṣṇu 
appears as Kṛṣṇa, Śeṣa supports and protects him by becoming his older 
brother. Since Śeṣa is the foremost Nāga, Āśleṣā attains its favorability 
towards the spiritual, in spite of and augmented by its otherwise 
netherworldly, pleasure loving nature. 

<<<PAGE 59>>>
59 
The divine qualities of Śeṣa are more fully and purely realized in Śeṣa’s 
own star: Uttara Bhādrapadā. But still, it is not difficult to see the 
intimate connection between Śeṣa and Āśleṣā. If we merely drop the “l” 
as an irregularity of pronunciation, the word Āśleṣā becomes ā-śeṣa - 
“the place of Śeṣa.” 
Āśleṣā interests humanity in mystical spirituality. 
Kāliya’s Battle with Kṛṣṇa  
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (10.16) tells the story of a powerful Nāga named 
Kāliya. Fearing Garuḍa, Kāliya made his home somewhere Garuḍa had 
been cursed to be unable to enter. That place happened to be in Kṛṣṇa’s 
forest: Vṛṇdāvana, within the depths of a pool formed by the river 
Yamunā. 
Kāliya demonstrated the power of holding (“āśleṣa”) by causing the 
water to take solid shapes. He constructed a palace for himself out of 
water, in the water, and lived there with many beautiful Nāga maidens. 
However, his toxicity made the lake and surrounding area polluted. So 
Kṛṣṇa jumped into the water one day to challenge Kāliya and evict him. 
Kāliya held Kṛṣṇa in an unbreakably strong embrace within his coils for a 
terribly long time. But Kṛṣṇa broke free and began to dance upon 
Kāliya’s hundreds of hoods, each attempting to bite and spit fiery poison 
upon him. With each artful step of the dance Kṛṣṇa kicked upon each 
hood – his feet illuminated by the jewels there like an artist illuminated 
on stage by footlights. One by one the heads of Kāliya were broken and 
defeated by Kṛṣṇa. However, the Nāga maidens beseeched Kṛṣṇa 
sweetly, and he spared Kāliya and allowed him to return to Nāgaloka 
with a promise that he need no longer fear Kṛṣṇa’s servant, Garuḍa. 
By Kṛṣṇa’s compassion, Kāliya became an enlightened serpent similar to 
Śeṣa.  Here are excerpts of his statements to Kṛṣṇa after becoming 
enlightened (Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.16.56-59): 

<<<PAGE 60>>>
60 
“I am sorry for fighting with you, but I am a serpent, so it is my nature to 
become aggressive when challenged. It is so difficult for a person not to 
be a creature of habit. Please forgive me.  
“You create the forces that create our habitual nature; that is why no 
one can overcome habit by their willpower alone. You are the wise 
being who frees everyone from bondage to their habitual conditioning. 
So, whether you punish me or show me mercy – either is for my benefit.” 
