# source: _OceanofPDF.com_360_degrees_of_wisdom_-_Lynda_Hill.pdf
# pages: 1-40
# compiled into: degrees.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 1>>>
360º
360 DEGREES 
 O F  W I S D O M :
THE SABIAN ORACLE
by Lynda Hill

<<<PAGE 2>>>
HOW TO USE THE SABIAN
ORACLE
There are several ways to use this book.
• Shuffle the cards and look up the Symbol in the book
• Think of a number between 1 and 360 and look up the relevant
page number.
• Open the book at random.
• Look up the Symbols for your birthday in the Birthday Table.
• Using your Birthchart investigate the Symbols for any planet or
point in the chart.
Like all Oracles,
whichever answer you find is the one you need.
May the Symbols
speak to you!

<<<PAGE 3>>>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It has taken 10 years for this book to evolve. I am incredibly grateful that I can stand on
the shoulders of giants such as Marc Edmund Jones, Dane Rudhyar and Elsie Wheeler.
So many people have helped me on my journey. Thank you to all those who believed in
the work, encouraged me or assisted me along the way.
Special thanks go to:
Richard Hill and his partner Sue Davis. Richard and I shared our lives for 20 years and
continue to be supportive of each other as we enter an exciting new period of our lives.
My daughter Jess—my wonderful editor and sounding board in the writing of this book.
Her brilliance has taught me many things; one of them being how to be a better writer.
My son Joel, the coolest person I know on the planet. He did more than his fair share of
the cooking whilst I sat at the computer.
Deirdre Hill, for so many things.
My father Ken Rigby, who for many years was an astrologer and an Edgar Cayce healer.
Alice Kashuba and Dale O’Brien, wonderful students of the Sabian Symbols, who were
there from the very beginning of my sojourns into the United States.
Gary Rabideau and Claudia Lapp for doing the Birthday Index and being great mates.
Elizabeth Paul Avedon for designing the Oracle cards, believing so strongly in my work
and giving me the step up the ladder that I needed at just the right time.
Paul Smyth for doing the wonderful layout and design.
Philip Sedgwick for being so special—such an incredible mind and inspiration.
Graham Dawson and Stephanie Johnson—directors of Esoteric Technologies Pty Ltd., the
company behind Australia’s successful astrology software programs Solar Fire, Solar Maps,
Solar Writer and Solar Spark for their enthusiastic nudge that led me to write the Oracle.
Eben Weiss, Michael Lutin, Ray Merriman, Alan Oken, Georgina Haul, Judith Levy, Bob
and Diana Zoller, Rick Levine, Scott Davis, Vicki and Dennis Spanogle, Janis Watson, Ananda
Bagley, Linda Reid, Ben Cameron, Chrissie Eglem, Deborah Kennedy, Yasmin Boland, Jessica
Adams, Ian Mortimer, Ada Cumming, Val and Frank Budny, Diana Hunter, Richard Giles and
Susie, Randy and Brian Main, Rick and Angie Romero
And all the special people who’ve touched my life.

<<<PAGE 4>>>
360 Degrees Of Wisdom: The Sabian Oracle
This book is dedicated to Elsie Wheeler
First published in 1995 by Hill & Hill P/L
First Edition March 1995
Reprinted August 1995
Revised Edition December 1995
Special Edition May 2002
© Lynda Hill 2004
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either in part or in whole, may
be reproduced, transmitted, translated, or utilized in any form or by
any means without permission in writing from the author or publisher,
with the exception of brief passages, quoted in articles, reviews or for
personal use.
Layout and cover design by Paul Smyth
Contact details: Lynda Hill P.O. Box 172 AVALON 2107 Australia
Ph:(61 2)9918.9539 Fax:(61 2)9973.1453
email: lyndah@bigpond.com
http://www.sabiansymbols.com

<<<PAGE 5>>>
CONTENTS
Preface ............................................................................................ i
The Sabian Symbol Story................................................................ ii
My Journey With The Sabian Symbols ........................................ viii
Using The Cards............................................................................. x
How To Prepare Oracle Cards .................................................... xiv
Using The Birthday Tables ........................................................... xv
ARIES ............................................................................................. 1
TAURUS.........................................................................................31
GEMINI .........................................................................................61
CANCER........................................................................................91
LEO .............................................................................................121
VIRGO.........................................................................................151
LIBRA..........................................................................................181
SCORPIO.....................................................................................211
SAGITTARIUS..............................................................................241
CAPRICORN ...............................................................................271
AQUARIUS ..................................................................................301
PISCES.........................................................................................331
Appendix A: Birthday Tables ......................................................361

<<<PAGE 6>>>
i
PREFACE
Introduction
More and more people in this new era are seeing how magical and mystical life
can be. We are finding our way into much broader, enriching and rewarding levels.
So many of us are now exploring the spiritual aspects of our existence; observing our
lives, and the effects we have on the people around us and on planet earth. Life today
is increasingly complex, however, with so many decisions to make and puzzles to solve.
We hunger for meaning and guidance and often want and need answers to life’s many
questions—here and now.
As many of us already know, there are tools for discovering what’s going on, and why,
which help us to find our path. Throughout history successive generations have created
intuitive guidance tools that reflected the vibration of their culture and their times—the
I Ching in ancient China; the Runes in Scandinavia; the Tarot in early Europe.
Oracles have been ‘read’ from an incredible array of objects including stones, bones,
tea—leaves, coins, sticks, the backs of tortoise shells and cards. The word “oracle” comes
from the Latin word meaning “to pray”. It is also connected to the word for mouth. An
oracle is described in Webster’s Dictionary as being ‘a divine announcement’ and ‘the
medium by which a god reveals hidden knowledge or makes known the divine purpose’.
Further, it is said to be ‘an authoritative or wise statement or prediction’. In essence an
oracle is a tool that allows a conversation with divine forces. They give us signposts and
maps so that we can make better, more informed choices in life. In truth, we have the
answers to the questions we ask inside of us; however we often need the answers to
come through a vehicle outside of ourselves. Now we have the Sabian Oracle, which
gives us a direct route into issues that reflect our modern era.
Based on the Sabian Symbols, first created in 1925, and consisting of 360 answers,
the Sabian Oracle can be used to guide us through questions about our day—to—day
lives: work, relationships, health, spirituality etc. Using the Sabian Oracle will help
you to discover what’s going on and why, leading to deeper self—awareness. You are
able to make more informed choices and greatly enhance your life. It provides us with
a psychic and spiritual tool for deep guidance, insight and the ability to see into the
amazing occurrences and synchronicities that occur to us and happen around us. You
can ask questions about what your future holds, how to go about doing something, what
you need to know about a situation or the people involved, directions on your spiritual
path or you can use it to get a message for the day. They lead us out of the wilderness
into a place of greater self—determination, fulfillment and enjoyment. Using them also
widens and enlarges our psychic abilities and awareness and increases our attunement
with our intuitive depths.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
i­
The Sabian Symbol story
What are the Sabian Symbols?
The ancients divided up the sky, just like any other circle, into 360 degrees. They
assigned each of the 12 constellations (star signs or zodiac signs) 30 degrees each: 12
times 30 = 360. The Sabian Symbols are a set of 360 phrases of words that correspond
with each of the 360 degrees of the wheel of the zodiac, from Aries 1 to Pisces 30.
Consisting from as little as 2 words (Virgo 2: ‘A Harem’) to as many as 21 words (Taurus
5: ‘A Youthful Widow, Fresh and Soul—Cleansed From Grief, Kneels at an Open Grave
to Receive the Secret of Eternal Life), each one of these Symbols holds both a story
and a unique energy field of their own. These images hold meaning for those degrees
of the signs. Although the Symbols have their foundations in astrology, absolutely no
knowledge of astrology is needed to use them.
The Sabian Symbols were given birth in San Diego, California, in 1925 by Marc
Edmund Jones, a noted American astrologer and spiritualist and the gifted clairvoyant
Elsie Wheeler. Jones was interested to find a set of word images to go with every degree
of the zodiac. Elsie Wheeler was an extraordinary clairvoyant confined to a wheelchair
for most of her life. Jones chose Elsie Wheeler as his partner in this ‘experiment’ as she
had a remarkable ability to “see” messages, images and symbols. She used this talent
to help her clients, but was rather weary of the standard questions she received, such
as “when will I be rich?” and “when will I meet the love of my life?” She was eager to
take part as she believed that this was an opportunity to really contribute something
to astrology.
How Elsie and Marc brought through the Symbols
One day in San Diego in 1925 (unfortunately the date was not recorded) not far from
the harbor, astrologer Marc Edmund Jones assisted spiritualist—medium Elsie Wheeler
into his car. Elsie was afflicted with severe arthritis, making any movement very difficult
and most likely painful. Marc’s car made its way from the house on India Avenue where
Elsie lived up the sloping hills to Balboa Park. Exactly where in the park they worked
is not known. Marc Edmund Jones wrote that they found a place where they could be
surrounded by the vibrations of modern American life but would not be disturbed by
passers—by. Also, as Elsie was unable to walk, they could not be moved from the car.
Marc Edmund Jones wrote in his book ‘The Sabian Symbols in Astrology’ (first
published in 1953), “Miss Elsie Wheeler was very anxious to start… it was necessary
to provide uninterrupted hours, with a problem of inevitable fatigue to be taken into
account. She had to be carried, no others could be present and conditions in general had
to enable her to function in her accustomed manner. Balboa Park in San Diego offered
a spot where a driveway was a matter of a very few yards from one of the city’s busiest
traffic intersections, fortuitously meeting the necessity that work of this sort be done in
the turmoil of some metropolitan center or other unusually dense aggregation of people

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Preface
iii
active in the business of being. There was a screen of trees and bushes, and during the
day no one would show any interest in a car parked here for a few hours.”
Marc had a set of 360 3” x 5” cardboard cards that he had prepared. These were
blank except for a small notation of the sign and number on one side (i.e. Aries 1, Aries
2 up to Pisces 30). Marc would shuffle the cards and place one in front of Elsie, neither
of them knowing the sign or number on the card. Marc wrote about this: “One card
was put face down before the medium, and she reported on the picture she saw by
inward vision. This was noted hurriedly in pencil on the card itself.” During the whole
process, Marc kept shuffling the cards. Hence, the Sabian Oracle clairvoyantly came
through Elsie’s psychically attuned mind completely at random (i.e. not in zodiac order
Aries 1, Aries 2, Aries 3 etc.) They did ninety Symbols, took a break, did another ninety,
had lunch and a short drive, then did another ninety and finished the last ninety at the
end of the day.
That the entire set of Sabian Symbols was visualized and recorded in one day is a truly
extraordinary feat! If the process of visualizing and recording the Symbols took four
hours in the morning and four hours in the afternoon, on average 45 Symbols would
have to have been visualized per hour, or one every minute and a half. Elsie Wheeler
was obviously tapping into another level of consciousness.
What they’d achieved on that day became clearer and clearer to Marc Edmund Jones
over the following years. He had called the exercise an ‘experiment’, but exactly what
they had discovered is still emerging today through the minds of those who use the
Symbols
The magic behind the 'Experiment'
Marc Edmund Jones believed that Elsie Wheeler had tapped into what he called the
‘ancient mind matrix’ of the Sabian alchemists of ancient Mesopotamia. Jones wrote
that “…psychism seams to deal with (a) sort of group identity, or with an intelligence
which is immortal in the fact that it can be revivified and consulted at will.”
Marc said that there was a presence and cooperation “on the invisible side of life”
of one of the Brothers of the ancient Sabian occult sect. At the end of the day, when
the entire Oracle had been completed, Marc sensed something was wrong with one
of the Symbols, and asked Elsie to do that particular one again. He felt this so strongly
that it occurred to him that he was being guided by something, so he asked Elsie if
‘the Brother’ was there. Upon hearing that he was, Marc asked her what he was doing,
to which she responded that he was “standing with his arms folded.” Marc then said
“Ask him why he didn’t correct that.” Elsie responded, “He says that is up to you.” It
appears that on all levels, a higher kind of ‘consciousness’ or ‘intelligence’ was operating.
Why the name‘Sabian’?
The Sabian Symbol story is embedded in the ancient cultures of the Middle East. Marc
Edmund Jones felt that there was an “unseen agency”—an external, esoteric mind—set at
work in the birthing of the Sabian Symbols. Connection was made through a ‘Brother’, a

<<<PAGE 9>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
iv
member of the ancient Mesopotamian brotherhood, the Sabian Brotherhood. He believed
that they were the ‘voices’ that were spiritually behind Elsie Wheeler, delivering the
messages that became the Symbols.
The Sabian people were an ancient race of alchemists, living in Harran, a city on
the banks of the Euphrates River in Mesopotamia, where astrology is said to have
originated. Harran existed from the third millennium BC to the thirteenth century AD.
It was the repository for the philosophy of the ancient Chaldeans, who were among
the founders of astrology. The Sabians were alchemists who were into talismanic magic
and hermeticism. Michael Baigent in his book ‘From the Omens of Babylon’ describes
talismanic magic as “the magic whereby a deity’s power is attracted or coerced down
to be concentrated into a physical object.. It is, perhaps, analogous to a huge spiritual
lens which might magnify and concentrate the powers from above.”
In early Babylonia the moon—cult was the national religion: the name Chaldeans
means ‘moon—worshippers’. As the religion was gradually wiped out elsewhere, the
Sabian people maintained and developed the tradition of Chaldean astrology. They
built temples to planets and their rather sophisticated system of alchemy linked the
7 planets (as were known then) with metals, colors and numbers. They worked with
talismans, oracles and magic. The last temple that was left standing was a moon temple,
destroyed by the Tartars in AD 1032. The sect itself disappeared during Mongol invasions
of the thirteenth century, when its water supply was diverted to a neighboring town.
The Visionaries behind the Oracle
Elsie Wheeler the clairvoyant
Elsie May Wheeler was born on September 3, 1887 at 9.39 pm in Norris City,
Illinois. Severely afflicted and crippled with arthritis, she spent her entire life in a
wheelchair. Jones said of her “She couldn’t turn her head and could barely hold her
hands” Her intuitive and visionary abilities were not impaired by her handicap. She
was an extraordinary clairvoyant and said to be blessed with the ability to see images
quickly and clearly.
In the 1920 Census, Elsie is listed as being at the Bethesda Hospital and Home for
the Incurables in St. Louis, Missouri. She moved to San Diego some time in the early
1920’s, living with her uncle Frank W. Baxter on India Street, Washington and Market
Street at various times. In the 1930 Census, Frank was listed as being a barber and Elsie
as a spiritualist medium. She spent many of her days at the San Diego Indoor Sports
club, a place disabled people have been socializing at since the early 1900’s, and is still
in operation today.
Even though her Birthday Symbol is Virgo 12: A Bride With Her Veil Snatched Away,
Elsie never married nor had children. It seems that she was “wedded” to a higher
spiritual purpose. Her ‘Veil’ seems to be firmly in place as not much has been recorded
or written about her, but the legacy she leaves behind lives on through the gift that is

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Preface
v
the Sabian Oracle. The beauty and grace with which she is said to have lived her life is
enhanced by the gift she gave to the world. She died at the age of 51 in San Diego on
the 26th November 1938.
Marc Edmund Jones the astrologer
Marc Edmund Jones was born on October 1, 1888, at 8:37 AM CST, in St. Louis,
Missouri. He lived a colorful and varied life, being a Presbyterian minister, American
Theosophist, occult philosopher and prolific scriptwriter for the film industry. Jones
was an astrologer for over sixty years and is widely accredited with having made major
contributions to the field of astrology. Not only did he create the Sabian Symbols, he
devised a whole different approach to the understanding and teaching of astrology,
assigning to it a more spiritual basis. He died on March 5, 1980, in Stanwood, WA at
the age of 91.
What is the zodiac?
The zodiac is an imaginary band of sky that follows the sun’s annual path as seen from
earth. If we could observe the motion of the sun against the stars for an entire year, it
would appear to trace out a large belt or circle in the sky that we call the “ecliptic”. This
circle also happens to be the plane of the earth’s orbit around the Sun. The zodiac is a thin
band of the sky on either side of the ecliptic. The word “zodiac” literally means “circle
of life”, or “circle of living beings” as most of the zodiac signs are animals or people.
The band is divided into twelve equal parts, each containing a different astrological
constellation. These are the Sun signs or Star signs of the zodiac.
The zodiac acts as the earth’s aura. Just as a human being possesses an aura which
surrounds and penetrates the physical body, so also is the Earth planet clothed with the
subtle matter of the zodiac. The physical plane is familiar ground to everyone, but not
so the spheres that lie beyond it. These include the etheric, the astral, the mental, the
spiritual, and the higher spiritual. All of these dimensions affect us in many ways.
The earliest recorded mention of the zodiac we know of comes from the lands of
ancient Mesopotamia, which is roughly the area of modern Iraq. The Mesopotamians,
most particularly the people of Babylon, recorded astronomical events on clay tablets.
These tablets show the first record of the use of the zodiac in the 5th century BC. Other
evidence for a Mesopotamian origin for the zodiac exists in the types of animals chosen
for the constellations (e.g. lions and scorpions).
What are Zodiac Signs?
The expressions “star sign”, “sun sign” or “zodiac sign” all actually mean the same
thing. When someone says “I’m an Aries”, what they’re really saying is they were born
at the time of the year when the sun was in the zodiac sign of Aries. In other words,
their sun sign is Aries. Because our calendar is designed to coincide with the motions of

<<<PAGE 11>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
vi
the Sun around the zodiac, the Sun is in Aries at nearly the same time period each year
(roughly March 21st to April 20th). Hence the 12 zodiac or sun signs are like months
of a calendar based on the zodiac.
The zodiac is divided into 12 signs, each 30 degrees long. The zodiac signs start
with Aries, which begins at the spot on the ecliptic where the Sun is on the first day of
spring in the northern hemisphere i.e. March 21. These 30 degree sections of the sky
mark out the signs from Aries through to the last sign, Pisces. The 12 signs of the zodiac
are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn,
Aquarius, and Pisces.
Some notes on symbolism
Symbolism is a catalyst or key to accessing our inner wisdom, our connection with
the universal consciousness, our spirit or soul—what some call the higher self. This
aspect of ourselves does not think in words, but in images, feelings, colors and sounds
from a symbolic perspective. It is the abstract part of our psyche that our logical and
rational society often does not accept as valid because it doesn’t make literal sense: it
requires interpretation into objective language, which is not always wholly adequate
or accurate.
One of the major current effects that is occurring is a real need to reconnect with ‘the
feminine’ —the right brain, intuitive functions. More than ever, we are realizing that the
left brain, the logical and reasoning mind, doesn’t provide wholly adequate answers to
the questions we are asking. We are finding more creative solutions that add meaning
to our lives and moments of illumination than we previously thought possible. We are
often surprised by images and situations that affect us far more deeply than is logically
explicable. It is symbolism that creates a pathway to our deeper understandings and
brings our deeper understandings into the conscious world. As Tom Chetwynd says
in his book Dictionary of Symbols “Symbols have always been treasured as a means of
releasing sources of energy from the unconscious.”
When we ask the Sabian Symbols a question, we must keep in mind the need to widen
our vision. Looking at the answer through a narrow range of focus may lead to missing
the many rewarding possibilities inherent in the answer we’re given. For instance, a
client asked about the romantic possibilities that were available to him as he was in
the process of breaking up a long term relationship. The answer he got was Leo 15: A
Street Pageant Moving Along a Street Packed With People. After a minute looking at
the Symbol, he realized the answer he was receiving was to get out into life, out where
there are lots of people in order to increase his possibilities of meeting someone. The
literal translation of the Symbol did not necessarily include that exact message for him;
it was more about adapting the Symbol to his particular question. However, it is indeed
possible that he may meet someone whilst at a street market, or bumping into someone
on the street, as these things are inherent in that Symbol.
Looking with an increased depth of view always helps when you’re dealing with
oracles.

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Preface
vii
Notes for astrologers
How does one use the Sabian Symbols in astrology?
When looking up the Symbol for a planet or placement in a chart, one must round up
the degree to the next whole number i.e., if the planet is at 27.15 Pisces, you should read
Pisces 28. This is because the zodiac starts at 00.00 Aries and the Symbols begin at
Aries 1. So, even if the degree you’re looking at is 27.00 Pisces, you would still read
Pisces 28. Having said that, it should be emphasized that the Symbol for the degree
before (i.e. Pisces 27) will shine a lot of light on the issue being investigated—the
degree before indicates the ‘karmic’ issues of the planet or placement, a talent that’s
been brought through or an issue that needs to be worked out and possibly let go of.
Think of the interpretations applied to the moon’s south node as a guide to the degree
before. The degree after (Pisces 29) is also very illuminating.
These Symbols can be used in every aspect of astrology, including horary, mundane,
electional and indeed for any of the zodiacal systems such as heliocentric, sidereal or
draconic. A great exercise that helps one to see more into these Symbols is to look up
the symbol for the Sun at sunrise and watch what happens throughout the day. You can
also tune into the degree of the new or full moon for clues to what’s going on during
that period.
. The Symbols can be applied to any point in the zodiac. They will reveal, at times
brilliantly and clearly, added layers of meaning to the degree of any of the planets, any
asteroids that one might use, the angles—in fact anywhere there’s a zodiacal degree.
My belief is that wherever one seeks meaning, one will find meaning.
As we move out of the Piscean age and into the Aquarian age, we are transmuting in
many ways, with the vibration of our spiritual and intellectual minds moving into higher
gears as we evolve. In such hectic times, we hunger for meaning and guidance, but
often don’t have the time or the patience to pause and reflect deeply on our situation.
The Sabian Oracle opens the doorway between our inner feelings and intentions and
our conscious mind. They do this by helping to put what is within us into words.
Being provided with possibilities enables us to act positively and confidently, and think
rationally.
Welcome to the wonderful mystical, magical Sabian Oracle.
Recommended reading:
The Sabian Symbols in Astrology by Marc Edmond Jones, Sabian Publishing Society, 1976.
An Astrological Mandala by Dane Rudhyar, Vintage Books (Random House), 1973.
From the Omens of Babylon: Astrology and Ancient Mesopotamia by Michael Baigent,
Arkana (Penguin) 1994.
The Sabian Assembly website: http://www.sabian.org
Lynda Hill’s website: http://www.sabiansymbols.com

<<<PAGE 13>>>
viii
MY JOURNEY WITH THE SABIAN SYMBOLS
Finding and studying the Sabian Symbols has changed my life far more than I could
have imagined. My life has been enormously enriched. The interest that people have
in the Sabian Symbols has led me to travel the world for the last 10 years, teaching and
giving readings and my articles are published in magazines and journals all over the
world. It feels like an honor to do this work.
These days, studying and spreading the message of the Sabian Symbols is an integral
part of my life. In my youth I didn’t understand why I was irresistibly drawn to certain
places. From 1976 and over the course of twenty years I traveled to more than 80
countries. I was most touched with the depth and wisdom of civilizations of the past,
particularly the middle east. I now realize I have been guided and driven to take this
journey—even from my early years.
I originally came across the Sabian Symbols in the late 1980’s. I found them
fascinating and very telling about a person’s life and indeed their destiny. I used them
here and there in my work and found them to be extraordinary in painting the stories
that we live out. However, on my birthday in 1992, a clairvoyant friend of mine, Georgina,
said that I had a mission to spread the word of something “special” in astrology. She told
me that I would be invited to speak at conferences in Australia and around the world,
particularly the United States. My instant response was, “Sure, Georgina, except when I
stand up in front of a crowd to speak, I turn to jelly. I even cried once.” I didn’t feel filled
with confidence on any level to do what she was saying I’d do. She continued, saying
that I’d write books, one of which would be a big success. I would become known for
teaching something special and I would gain the respect of my peers. I remember her
words when I protested that I had nothing special to lecture or write about: “Well, I’m
just telling you what I’m seeing.”
Despite my reluctance, at first, to admit it, the things that Georgina said to me
resonated with what I wanted. Two weeks later, in my office, I decided to “ask” for what
she’d said. I stated what I wanted, holding the thought for a moment or two. I asked for
something “special” to contribute to astrology, for the ability to be able to lecture and
write, for the respect of my peers and to be able to travel with my work. Soon after,
I picked up a copy of Dane Rudhyar’s ‘An Astrological Mandala’, a book published in
1973 on the Sabian Symbols, and within weeks of asking for these things, I was tearing
around the house like a woman possessed, researching and writing about them.
Within the next month I lectured for the first time in my life: I gave two lectures
in Sydney and 5 months later delivered my first talk to an American audience at the
Aquarian Revelation Conference in Lansing, Michigan. I also spoke on a panel at that
conference in front of some three hundred people at the invitation of one of astrology’s
brightest stars, Alan Oken. In the thirteen years since then, I have given lectures,
workshops and readings in the United States, England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Holland,
South Africa, New Zealand and Australia. At the time of writing this, I’ve completed
19 lecture tours of the United States and three world tours. Every step of the way I’ve
felt guided and supported.

<<<PAGE 14>>>
My Journey With The Sabian Symbols
ix
It really all began at the age of 22. I felt compelled to travel to the Middle East, to
walk on the soil and breathe the air. I felt particularly drawn to Iraq, Turkey and Jordan.
On this particular trip, in 1976, I was interested in astrology, but didn’t have any in-depth
understanding of it; I certainly had no awareness of the Sabian Symbols.
I arrived in Tehran by myself to meet up with a bus tour that would take me
through the Middle East, taking in Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Israel, Turkey and
then through Europe to London. It was an “overland expedition” that drew the young,
alternative-minded travelers of the day. We were told that we were the second bus to
be given permission to travel through Iraq after the borders opened up. I joined 36
Australian, British, New Zealand and U.S. nationals and careened off through the lands
of Iran and Iraq. Here I was, 22 years old, in the cradle of civilization: Baghdad, Babylon,
Ur, Ctesiphon, Petra, Aqaba, Jerusalem, etc, relishing the atmosphere and wondering, at
times, what I was doing there. The trip left an indelible impression on me. I remember
saying that I had photographs of the people of Iraq in my photo album, and pictures of
them in my heart. When I’d say this, I’d wonder why I felt it so strongly.
During my visit to Petra, the ancient rose-red city in southern Jordan, I was sitting
in the amphitheatre and suddenly had an overwhelming sense of emotion engulf me.
In completely alien surroundings, I felt I’d been brought home. I was even moved to say
“thank you” to some higher being. I had never felt truly at home anywhere, and haven’t
felt the same in any of the 80 or so countries I’ve traveled to since.
In 1995, Robert Zoller, a New York medieval astrology scholar who translates ancient
Latin astrological texts into English, was my tour guide around New York. I spoke of
my fascination with the Middle East and particularly Petra. We were walking along the
street when he pointed out that the Sabian alchemists’ ancestors from Mesopotamia,
an area which encompassed modern day Iraq, were the Nabateans, the people who
built Petra. This aroused feelings in me that defy words or logic. How extraordinary
that some 20 years before, Petra had felt so amazingly familiar.
These kinds of synchronicities really do defy words. It’s an amazing journey, this
journey we’re on! Life is more amazing than we know and the Sabian Symbols help us
realize its magic and mystery.
Lynda Hill
January 2004
Avalon, Sydney

<<<PAGE 15>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
x
USING THE ORACLE CARDS
First—concentrate on your question or situation
The Sabian Oracle seems to work most effectively when your question is important
to you and your concentration is undisturbed. This is true of most oracles. However,
if you want guidance and are not sure which question to ask, you can ask “what do I
need to know most?” or “what’s coming up for me?” There are no rules, but the more
focused you are, the more you will understand what the Oracle is telling you.
Pick a red card and a blue card
The simplest method is to pick two cards, one red and one blue. The red cards are
marked with a sign and the blue ones with a number.
Look up the answer in the book
The end result (e.g. Aquarius 29) is then looked up in the book and the answer
needs to be contemplated.
It really is as simple as that.
However, there are other ways of selecting a Symbol. Each page has been numbered
from 1 to 360 so that you can simply choose a number in your mind or even a number
that may come up in your surroundings. You can also randomly choose a sign and a
number; or perhaps just open the book and see where your eyes fall. However, the
thing to remember when using these other methods is after using them for some time
you may effect the selection by preferring particular numbers or signs or the book
may open to the most often used pages. The best method by far is the card method. It
ensures a true selection that the others may not.
The rule I use for accessing the wisdom of The Sabian Symbols is that there are
no mistakes, even if you read the ‘wrong’ interpretation, or find out later you’ve made
some kind of mistake. There are no mistakes. We receive the message we’re meant to
receive when we’re meant to.
If a card falls or jumps (as they sometimes do) out of the deck, attention should be
paid to it. For instance, if you’ve just selected a red card and its Aries and the number
18 falls out as you’re shuffling, you should continue, select another blue card, but refer
to Aries 18 as part of your answer.
Sometimes, the first answer outlines the actual situation, and gives advice about
it. You may indeed need further guidance and consulting the Sabian Oracle again will
provide deeper insight. There are no rules for how many times you should consult the
Oracle about a particular question, but it must be remembered that time should be

<<<PAGE 16>>>
xi
taken in considering what it is telling you. The first answer is most likely to contain the
purest expression of the situation and any subsequent queries on the same matter will
show added layers and descriptions. Unfortunately, continuing to pull the cards until
you get the ‘right answer’ is not a good way to go about it, as you can become confused
and lose the wisdom that should really be helping you.
You can also make up your own spreads. For instance, you could pull three
cards about an issue: one for the past, one for the present and one for the future. The
possibilities are only limited by the imagination.
A magical tool we can all use
Remarkable things happen when we use the Sabian Symbols. Events can become
unreal and multi-layered. Watching the Symbol come alive around you expands your
sense of everything being interrelated and events of synchronicity happen more and
more often. Things often occur that defy explanation.
One such time was during a workshop in New Zealand. During the first part of my
lecture, a woman at the back of the class asked if she could use numerology to come
up with a Sabian Symbol. I replied that it didn’t matter what system was used to come
up with a Symbol, there would be meaning in it. With expressions of amazement she
told the class that she’d added up the numbers for the letters in her name and it came
to 35. She’d looked up the Sabian Symbol on page 35—Taurus 5: ‘A Youthful Widow,
Fresh and Soul Cleansed From Grief, Kneels at an Open Grave to Discover the Secret
of Eternal Life’. Her husband had built a coffin for her! The woman said that the coffin
was stored in their garage and every time she drove in and out of the garage, she was
confronted by it. She said it was to save money and added that he’d built one for himself,
their two coffins stood on end, side-by-side in her garage.
The Sabian Symbols can have a sense of humor at times. I was speaking at an
astrology conference in Moscow in 1996. A party was held for the speakers, both
foreign and Russian, on Saturday night in the hostel room of a couple of the Russian
academics. It was by no means luxurious; it was a cheap student hostel. One by one,
the furniture in the room collapsed. First the table where I had put 2 bottles of wine;
then we were warned not to sit on a particular chair and a different one collapsed and
the bed collapsed into pieces as we tried to move it to make way for more people.
Amongst gales of laughter, somebody drew two cards to get a message for the
moment. They drew Virgo 27: ‘Aristocratic Elderly Ladies Drinking Afternoon Tea in a
Wealthy Home’—the Sabian Symbols revealing a great sense of humor, as this was the
exact opposite of what was happening. The guy whose bed fell apart fell against the
wall and slid down it, laughing. The Symbol was showing the sheer wealth of spirit
and enjoyment.
Of course, many times the answer will reflect serious and important issues in your
life. One client of mine selected the Symbol Virgo 22: ‘A Royal Coat of Arms Enriched
With Precious Stones’. Up until she pulled that Symbol she wasn’t feeling very happy or
regal at all. However, what she read surprised and encouraged her as she was directly

<<<PAGE 17>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xii
descended from New Guinea royalty and the Symbol was reminding her of it. It told
her to believe in herself and always hold her head up high.
Several years ago, our 14 year old tabby cat, Bubbles, died. We were all very upset,
especially my two children. The same day she died, my daughter Jess, who was about 12
at the time, asked me if we could ask the Sabian Oracle for a message about Bubbles. She
picked two cards and the answer she received was at once enlightening and reassuring;
Aquarius 14: A Train Entering a Tunnel. We somehow knew that Bubbles was heading
for the ‘light’ and we sat and cried together tears of joy, feeling that she was moving
somewhere towards the light. The following day, Jess asked if we could ask the Oracle
again. I hesitated, wondering what on earth it could tell us, but knowing that the Oracle
is always illuminating in some measure, I decided to take another look. The Symbol
Jess got was Leo 27 Daybreak – The Luminescence of Dawn in the Eastern Sky. That
felt extraordinary! Reading the words I’d written about that Symbol was very healing
for Jess: “You may feel that there is finally a chance for a new beginning. Things have
been sacrificed and there may be a certain emptiness, but now you can see the light and
move forward again. New ideas, new opportunities, new perspectives, new realizations
are emerging.” It seemed to us that Bubbles had reached the other side, indeed it felt
that she was reincarnating!
Some things to remember
The ‘you’ referred to in the wording of the text may refer to you, a friend, the
situation you’re in, etc. Read the text and look to see how it fits the particular situation
you’re enquiring about.
Sometimes the image of the Symbol opens up a dialogue between your intuitive
awareness and conscious awareness, sometimes it is the text, sometimes just snippets
of it, but the purpose of the Symbols is not only to instruct you, but also inspire you
to recognize and realize your own understanding of the answer – the answer that is
right for you.
There are a number of generally accepted meanings and archetypes to certain
images. It is, however, important to remember that each individual must allow for
their own personal response to a Symbol. The Symbols will have different meanings
to different people at different times in different situations, although the nature of the
Symbol will define the parameters of possibility
The more you expand your vision, the more you’ll find layers and layers of meaning.
There is always more to a Sabian Symbol than first meets the eye. If you take notice, you
will see actual representations of the Symbol in the world around you. For instance,
you may pull Aquarius 29: ‘A Butterfly Emerging From a Chrysalis’ and see butterflies
around you: Perhaps you’ll be walking out doors and a butterfly floats past you, you go
to lunch and your girlfriend turns up wearing a butterfly clip, you see a butterfly in an
advertisement on the television. Clues can pop up everywhere, particularly if you leave
your mind open and receptive to the impressions. Further, the more you open up to
seeing the Symbol around you, the more you will expand your psychic awareness. Your
intuition will reward you more and more with deeper insights and understanding.

<<<PAGE 18>>>
Using The Oracle Cards
xiii
What separates the Sabian Symbols from most other symbolic oracles is that the
language is modern and reflects the images of today. A wonderful oracle like the I Ching
is made difficult by the references to things that were relevant to the ancient Chinese
culture. Things like princes, tigers and ox-carts. The Sabian Symbols talk about cars,
trains and airplanes. In the symbolic context these images have clear and current
meaning. The Car is symbolic of the individual; a Train speaks of the collective; Window
Shopping of desirable things that are out of reach; the Glass Bottomed Boat shows
observing things and viewing the emotions; Santa Claus bringing gifts; and so on.
The Caution section at the bottom of each page is included to open your mind to
the more difficult or confronting possibilities that you may need to be watchful for
in your situation. Your intuition will soon tell you if the situation surrounding your
question is more positive or negative.
The greatest barrier to understanding what the Symbol is telling you is not allowing
your mind to switch to an intuitive way of thinking. It’s best not to let the rational mind
and your hopes and desires color your interpretation. Spend time and wait until you
become aware of the answer that feels right—even if the answer is difficult. We tend
to grow spiritually or emotionally through difficult experiences. The Sabian Oracle is
here to give you a guiding hand. The answers truly lie inside you; the Oracle serves to
make you consciously aware of them.
I advise people using the Sabian Symbols to use them as a tool for inspiration and
guidance. Look at the words and allow your mind to become consciously aware of your
situation. It is by taking control and ownership of your own experience that makes a
tool like the Sabian Oracle so valuable.
To learn more about how to use the Sabian Symbols, and how to apply them in
astrology, please visit http://www.sabiansymbols.com

<<<PAGE 19>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xiv
All you need is two packs of ordinary playing cards with different colour
(or style of) backing. Most commonly available is red and blue. You can
use only one pack, but you will need to make some marking on the back
or add a sticker to distinguish between the court cards and number cards.
Creating the 42 cards:
1. Separate the court cards from the number cards. (The Ace is a number card)
2. Remove and discard the Spade number cards. (Ace - 10)
3. Put the red backed court cards with the blue backed number cards.
(You will then have a spare set of blue court cards and red number cards)
4. Now you are ready to name the court cards and number the number cards.
Naming and numbering the cards:
The court cards represent the 12 Sun signs and the number cards represent the
30 degrees. You now need to mark the cards. You can use an indelible pen or
some other form of permanent marker. You can also use stickers that you can
write on..
The correspondences:
Aries ______ K
Taurus ____ Q
Gemini ____ J
Cancer ____ K
Leo _______ Q
Virgo _____ J
Libra ______ K
Scorpio ____ Q
Sagittarius _ J
Capricorn _ K
Aquarius __ Q
Pisces _____ J
1-10 ___A - 10
11-20 __ A - 10
21-30 __A - 10
Your cards are now ready!
HOW TO PREPARE
ORACLE CARDS
In case you misplace your cards, here is a method to create a replacement 
deck.

<<<PAGE 20>>>
Using the Birthday Index
You can learn a lot about yourself by looking up the Sabian Symbol for your birthday
(go to Appendix A for the Birthday Table). For each day of the year, there are three Sabian
Symbols listed. Each of these will all have an effect on your life in some way. Sometimes
the message of a Symbol listed for a birthday will immediately stand out, other times
the meaning may not be quite so obvious. The Sabian Symbols are played out through
the way we express our personalities and by the events in our lives. Alternatively, you
may see the Symbol demonstrated through the agency of someone else in your life;
friends, parents, partners etc. However, even in the case of seeing the Symbol expressed
through somebody else, it is often that person mirroring something that you perhaps
haven’t noticed or learnt about yourself.
It is also extremely useful to look up the Symbols for the date of an event, something
that’s happened, or indeed, something you’re planning to do. If you are planning a
wedding or a party, for instance, see what the Symbols are saying for that date.
Celebrity Birthday Symbol Examples
Princess Diana - July 1
Cancer 9 – a Small Naked Girl Bends over a Sparkling Pond Trying to Catch a Fish
Diana was often photographed in her bathing costume, swimming in the ocean
or relaxing by a pool. This Symbol also speaks of naiveté and innocence, qualities she
was both known and admired for.
Cancer 10 – A Large Diamond in the First Stages of the Cutting Process
When the first pictures of Diana appeared in the media, she was like a beautiful
uncut diamond. As the years went by, we saw a beautiful woman emerge, well known
for her penchant for fashion and beauty.
Cancer 11 – A Clown is Caricaturing Well Known Personalities
The ‘Clown’ is reflected in her need to put on a face for many occasions. It seems
she was seldom really allowed to just ‘be herself’.
Michael Jackson - August 29
Virgo 6 - A Merry Go Round
The ‘Merry Go Round’ reflects his life as more circus than reality. Indeed, he has
merry go rounds at his own theme park/home, Neverland.
Virgo 7 – A Harem
Among other things, the Harem Symbol speaks of his large family and his sizable

<<<PAGE 21>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xvi
entourage of people.
Virgo 8 - A Girl Takes Her First Dancing Lesson
Jackson can easily take credit for changing the face of modern dance.
Christopher Reeve - September 25
Libra 2 - The Light of the Sixth Race Transmuted to the Seventh
This Symbol speaks of his days as Superman, plus the “superhuman” qualities he
expresses in his everyday life. In the movie ‘Superman’, he is portrayed as coming from
a planet that is more highly evolved than Earth.
Libra 3 - The Dawn of a New Day Reveals Everything Changed
One moment he was a vital, athletic and able man, the next minute he was in a
totally new reality, facing life in a wheelchair. Reeves has also said that after the accident,
every single time he woke up, he’d have to face the reality he was really in after having
dreams that pictured him with full mobility.
Libra 4 - A Group of Young People Sit in Spiritual Communion around a Campfire
Reeve has an uncanny ability to bring people together in a common cause—his
work for the support of spinal research has developed worldwide awareness.
Hillary Clinton - October 26
Scorpio 2 -A Broken Bottle and Spilled Perfume
Hillary had an amazing capacity to restrain her emotions during the scandals
surrounding her husband. Even though the ‘contents’ of her marriage and private life
were ‘Spilled’ (so to speak!), she retained a high degree of dignity.
Scorpio 3 – Neighbors Help in a House-Raising Party in a Small Village
Hillary is known for her community work. Indeed, she wrote a book titled “It
Takes a Village”.
Scorpio 4 – A Youth Holding a Lighted Candle in a Devotional Ritual
This Symbol speaks about Hillary’s devotion, her causes and her career. Her
speeches are often focused on talking about our hopes and fears, and about our
children’s futures.
Deepak Chopra - 22 October
Libra 28 -A Man Alone in Deep Gloom. Unnoticed, Angels are Coming to His Aid
People all over the world claim that his philosophies have helped them through
difficult periods of their life.

<<<PAGE 22>>>
Using The Birthday Index
Libra 29 – Mankind’s Vast and Enduring Effort to Reach for Knowledge Transferable
from Generation to Generation
Chopra’s books seem to have assumed a timeless quality, and an appeal to people
of all ages.
Libra 30 - Three Mounds of Knowledge on a Philosopher’s Head
This is indicative of his finely tuned teachings and ideas.
Marilyn Monroe - June 1
Gemini 10 - An Airplane Dives Toward the Earth as Though Falling
Through taking risks her life often got out of hand. This symbol also reflects the
depressions she frequently experienced.
Gemini 11 – Newly Opened Lands Offer the Pioneer New Opportunities for Experience
This Symbol paints the picture of how Norma Jean went off to Hollywood, starting
a brand new life.
Gemini 12 – A Black Slave Girl Demands Her Rights of Her Mistress
Marilyn was under estimated by both her peers in the movie industry and her
audience. People saw her as just a pretty face and didn’t take her seriously.
Recently, I met a Pisces woman who was lamenting being married to an Aries man.
She said she was tired of battling with him. I asked her what her birth date was and
she replied March 3. I told her that one of her Sabian Symbols was Pisces 13 - A Sword,
Used in Many Battles, In a Museum. I explained to her that ‘battling’ was not something
she wanted to be doing anymore. This Symbol gives the advice “There may have been
a lot learnt in the ‘Battles’ you’ve experienced, but one thing that’s best learnt is that
continuing to fight may lead to a bitter end, with no one being a true winner’. The
Symbol for Pisces 14 – A Lady Wrapped in Fox Fur contained clues to how she needs
to use her feminine intelligence in order to get the most out of her relationship with
her husband.
I asked what her husband’s birthday was. Her reply was the 11th April. One of the
Symbols for his birthday is Aries 21 - A Boxer is Entering the Ring. She explained how
he would take any opportunity to pick on her or to start a fight. This insight lead to
some extraordinary insights into their situation and no doubt helped her to understand
what was happening between the two of them. In order for him to gain the benefits
of the other Sabian Symbol for his birthday – Aries 22 – The Gate to the Garden of All
Fulfilled Desires, he had to drop his “warring” attitude and accept his life for all the
beauty and promise it contained without fighting or being defensive.
But enough about everybody else—it’s time for you to look up your own Birthday
Symbols!

<<<PAGE 23>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xviii

<<<PAGE 24>>>
ARIES
E
1
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN HAS RISEN OUT OF THE
OCEAN,A SEAL IS EMBRACING HER
Commentary: ‘A Woman Has Risen Out of the Ocean’. She is
consciously aware of leaving the past behind in order to emerge
into a whole new arena of existence and activity. The ‘Seal
Embracing Her’ symbolizes her being welcomed into this new
arena. This degree is right on the cusp of Pisces and Aries, when
the yearly astrological cycle begins again. It’s like the beginning
of a new year. In the Northern hemisphere it marks the beginning
of spring—the Spring Equinox. Long ago there was a belief that
the spirits of those who had drowned at sea had the ability to
enjoy life in the ocean in the form of ‘Seals’. When they wished,
the Selkies could, once per moon cycle, swim ashore, drop their
sealskins and become mortals again.
Oracle: New understandings and awareness are coming to light.
Whatever is emerging, either in you or around you needs to be
accepted, welcomed and nurtured. It’s best to resist the old
familiar ways of being or relating as they can pull you back to
outgrown and possibly unsatisfactory conditions. Maybe you feel
you are not being acknowledged, don’t have a voice or are not
being heard. Take heart as comfort and salvation are likely to be
found in the most unexpected places. Despite any setbacks, be
aware that you possess the power to make the necessary changes
in your life. It is time to claim your place or make a mark in this
new world. So much potential lies ahead of you. Welcome this
new beginning and be fearless in the face of the changes that
are coming. Accept the ‘Embrace’ of those who welcome you
into this new sphere. It is inevitable that you’ll leave something
behind as you move into this new territory. Enjoy the journey
and give birth to self-love, self-worth and divine creativity. Let
go of the past and emerge into life and love.
Keywords: Cycles starting. Beginnings. Emergence into concrete
manifestation. Embracing and honoring the shadow. Recognizing
our animal side. Tropical islands or lands. Rocky shores. Seals.
Oceans and water. Shedding skins. Transmutation. The Selkie
myth. Grounding one’s energy. Stepping between the sea and
the shore. Androgyny. Love and its embrace. Finding your feet
and your voice. Mermaids.
The Caution: Using masculine power to overshadow emotions.
Refusing to move on. Feeling held back by fears and old life
patterns. Falling back into previous, unsatisfactory conditions.
Dragging others backwards. Immobilizing fear of the unknown.
Being just another “fish in the sea”.
Change starts when someone
sees the next step.
William Drayton
But the beginning of things,of
a world especially,is necessarily
vague,tangled,chaotic,and
exceedingly disturbing.How
few of us ever emerge from
such a beginning! How many
souls perish in its tumult!
Kate Chopin
Who would be A merman bold,
Sitting alone Singing alone
Under the sea,With a crown of
gold,On a throne?
Lord AlfredTennyson
The journey of a thousand
leagues begins from beneath
your feet.
LaoTzu
And forget not that the earth
delights to feel your bare feet
and the winds long to play with
your hair.
Kahlil Gibran
Everything teaches transition,
transference,metamorphosis:
therein is human power,in
transference,not in creation;
and therein is human destiny,
not in longevity but in removal
we dive and reappear in new
places.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Aries 1

<<<PAGE 25>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
2
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A COMEDIAN ENTERTAINING A GROUP
OF FRIENDS
Commentary: ‘A Comedian Entertaining a Group of Friends’ is
seen. The function of the ‘Comedian’ is to show that there’s a need
to have a lighter and more positive attitude to ourselves, others
and life in general. He’s ‘Entertaining a Group of Friends’ which
promotes a feeling of coming together or sharing through laughter
and fun. The talk may center on people, things or situations with
the more amusing aspects brought out. An objective awareness
of life can bring enjoyment to concerns as we see things in a
different or wider perspective.
Oracle: We often need to be reminded that we are essentially
human and share the same imperfections, frailties and
shortcomings as the next person. Look for the fun in what’s going
on around you as light relief can often be found through seeing
the humor and the funny side. In answer to your question this
Symbol often shows that there’s a need to let go of seriousness.
Try looking at things with a smile on your face. Simple changes
in attitude or approach can often free your mind and bring about
a much better outcome. However, this can show somebody not
taking life seriously enough or perhaps putting on a show to get
attention or to be liked. Look at what’s happening and evaluate
it: Is there any truth in what’s being said or is it really just a joke?
Although there is often pleasure in sharing fun, sometimes it is
just masking the more serious aspects of the situation. The old
saying “many a truth is told in jest” is often right. Things are
often revealed by a slip of the tongue. Whatever, remember; it’s
good to be lighthearted–and other people’s spirits will probably
be raised at the same time.
Keywords: Seeing the funny side. Having insights. Always being
on the ‘go’ mentally. Putting on a show for others. Having presence
and charisma. Being the life of the party. Banter. Cracking up
with laughter. Ragging each other. Humorous interplay. Saying
what the group wants to hear. Jokes. The buffoon. Inside jokes.
The jester.
The Caution: Being silly or trivial to avoid reality and gain
acceptance. Feeling separate because of different views. Not
seeing the light side. Being a bore with many irrelevant things
said. Being flippant and insincere. Not being amused. Demanding
the spotlight. Feeling responsible for how others feel. Not
knowing when to stop. Not having good boundaries.
In the end,everything is a gag.
Charlie Chaplin
Sometimes when reading
Goethe I have the paralyzing
suspicion that he is trying to be
funny.
Guy Davenport
The best way to cheer yourself
up is to try to cheer somebody
else up.
MarkTwain
To make mistakes is human;to
stumble is commonplace;to
be able to laugh at yourself is
maturity.
Proverb
The ultimate test of whether
you possess a sense of humor
is your reaction when someone
tells you you don’t.
FrankTyger
Not one shred of evidence
supports the notion that life is
serious.
Anon
A serious and good
philosophical work could be
written consisting entirely of
jokes.
LudwigWittgenstein
Different taste in jokes is a great
strain on the affections.
George Eliot
Aries 2

<<<PAGE 26>>>
ARIES
E
3
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CAMEO SHOWS THE PROFILE OF A
MAN THAT SUGGESTS THE OUTLINE OF
HIS COUNTRY
Commentary: ‘A Cameo Profile’ is a simple yet strong definition
of an individual’s character, shape, loyalties and role in life.
The ‘Cameo’ suggests the appearance of a growing objective
awareness of how someone fits into the larger picture. You may
find that you, or someone else, have a more important role than
was previously thought; or that you are imprinting your mark; or
possibly becoming a model of one’s tradition, culture, thoughts
or ideas.
Oracle: There’s often a need to feel included or involved in the
larger picture in order to feel “whole” or accepted. Taking the
time to examine your place in society can bring about insights
into just what the big picture is for you. Understanding and
expanding your true place in the scheme of things can lead to
actually having a much larger ‘Profile’. This could be on any
level, emotional, physical, mental or spiritual. The ‘Country’ that
this Symbol implies may not have national boundaries. There
is the spiritual “country”, the ideological “country”, even past
life “countries”. There are some people who find their roots in
a mixture of these places, or realities, and don’t actually feel
a belonging to their actual “homeland”. The sense of having a
place is often deep-seated and truly found in the individual’s
belonging to the essential self. How do you, and others, fit into
this situation? Does your ‘Profile’ define you in a different way
from what you’d like, or are you happy with the outline of your
image? Picture who you want to be or what you want out of
life. Using a pen and paper, draw your ‘Cameo’ or just picture
what the outline of your ‘Country’ should be, as it could be an
interesting exercise. We are what we believe we are. What face
are you showing to the world?
Keywords: Observing one’s limitations. Living a life that is large.
Atlases and maps. Standing by one’s self. Allegiances with creed,
religion, race or country. Nationhood. Brotherhood. The land.
People in uniforms of any kind. The face of fighters who fought
‘the good fight’. Borders and limitations to activity. Identification.
Expatriates.
The Caution: Stereotyping one’s self or others. Blindly following
the dogma of parents, government or officials. Not seeing the
true essence of one’s self. Expecting to fit into some “shape” or
model. Becoming identified with externals. Seeking recognition
from others.
As a woman I have no country.
As a woman my country is the
whole world.
VirginiaWoolf
He worked like hell in the
country so he could live in the
city,where he worked like hell
so he could live in the country.
Don Marquis
A man’s country is not a certain
area of land,of mountains,
rivers,and woods,but it is a
principle;and patriotism is
loyalty to that principle.
GeorgeWilliam Curtis
Socrates said he was not an
Athenian or a Greek,but a
citizen of the world.
Plutarch
He who has an art has
everywhere a part.
Romanian Proverb
I have never belonged
wholeheartedly to a country,a
state,or to a circle of friends,nor
even to my own family.
Albert Einstein
All the world is a stage,and all
the men and women merely
players.They have their exits
and entrances;each man in his
time plays many parts.
William Shakespeare
Aries 3

<<<PAGE 27>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
4
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO LOVERS ARE STROLLING THROUGH
A SECLUDED WALK
Commentary: ‘Two Lovers’ are shown ‘Strolling Through a
Secluded Walk’. This image shows that there’s sometimes a need
to escape the realities of the world and touch the deeper feelings
of one’s heart. The ‘Secluded Walk’ that the ‘Lovers’ are taking
pictures the need for private time, solitude or quiet romance. An
actual ‘Secluded Walk’ may not be necessary – what is important
is the ability to exclude outside energies that interfere with the
sharing of intimate time.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that some time should be taken
away from the hustle and bustle of the everyday world, even
if only for a short while. Sometimes a detour must be taken
and the materialistic world put aside in order to share special
moments with someone close to you. You may desire, or even
need to exclude others or outside energies from your life at the
moment. These things may be interfering with what needs to
be said or done in order to solve relationship difficulties and
to move forward in life. If you are by yourself in this situation,
the solution may lie in taking time off and just being alone and
rediscovering yourself. This can open the door to sharing more
intimate dimensions of yourself with another person when you
feel you’re ready for it. This is especially true if your life has been
hectic or confused recently. Sending out an invitation to someone
special to share moments of your life may bring more rewards
than are immediately apparent. Can you schedule things so that
you can afford some time out?
Keywords: Walking love’s path. Secret love affairs. Seeking shelter
from others’ eyes. Wanting or needing to be undisturbed. The
young at heart. Being by one’s self and wondering where the
‘’other’’ is. Romance. Quiet moments. Seclusion and peace.
Intimacy and sharing. Desired destinations. Walking and strolling
together. “Keep Out” signs. Relationships that are solid and
satisfying. Issues of seclusion, inclusion or exculsion. Privacy.
Being self-sufficient.
The Caution: Being ‘selfish’ by keeping one’s partner or friend
to oneself. Jealousy when others are around. Feeling ‘left out’
and uninvited. Narrow-minded responses to people or things.
Loneliness and/or the desire to be left alone. Denial of self and
needs. Not wanting contact. Rejecting those who don’t measure
up. Seeing one’s partner as a possession.
Let there be spaces in your
togetherness.
Kahlil Gibran
Whether joy or sorrowful,the
heart needs a double,because
a joy shared is doubled and a
pain that is shared is divided.
Ruckett
The man who goes alone can
start today;but he who travels
with another must wait till the
other is ready,and it may be a
long time before they get off.
Henry DavidThoreau
I was never less alone than
when by myself.
Edward Gibbon
Far from the madding crowd’s
ignoble strife.
Thomas Gray
Love does not consist in gazing
at each other,but in looking
together in the same direction.
Antoine De Saint-Exupery
I was never less alone than
when by myself.
Edward Gibbon
Far from the madding crowd’s
ignoble strife.
Thomas Gray
Aries 4

<<<PAGE 28>>>
ARIES
E
5
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WHITE TRIANGLE IS SEEN;IT HAS
GOLDEN WINGS
Commentary: ‘A White Triangle’ with ‘Golden Wings’ is a
spiritually uplifting image. It is hard to know exactly what the
clairvoyant Elsie Wheeler saw when she received this image,
but it could be that she saw the vision of a moth—the White
Triangle Tortrix which has gold colored wings. The Symbol it
implies the possibility of being able to raise yourself above the
ordinary, using your natural gifts to find a new perspective into
what’s going on. What’s needed is an uplifted view to expand
your scope of awareness.
Oracle: This is a beautiful Symbol that indicates that you don’t
have to feel stuck in the present situation – you can rise above it
to something more spiritual, beautiful and joyful. It can picture
an eagerness for spiritual integration. At this time there may
be a need not to ground your visions, but allow them the free
flight of imagination. However, sometimes the drive for spiritual
integration or the longing for ecstatic experiences can cause a
feeling of being out of touch with reality. It is important to
persevere through any feelings of disorientation until a new
sense of balance is discovered—then the grounding of your
vision (or situation) can take place naturally. Use your imagination
and remember to integrate the three agencies: body, mind and
spirit. ‘A White Triangle With Golden Wings’ is a wonderful image
or mandala for meditation. Drawing it on a piece of paper and
hanging it up on the wall may well bring some amazing insights
into the situation or the question that has brought you to the
Oracle. Seeking harmony will cause things to move, sometimes
in a very surprising way!
Keywords: Inspiration and zeal. Feeling elevated and inspired
through spiritual or creative agencies. Flying to a greater
perspective. Taking off. Purity of thought and expression. Angelic
forms. Creative imagination. Self-transcendence. Finding new
dimensions of experience. Illusions of sight. Visions. Untethered
imaginations. Ascension. Ascended beings. Moths. Butterflies.
Flying Machines.
The Caution: Not noticing your own down-to-earth needs
or the needs of those around you. Losing the plot. Escapism.
Forgetting about the requirements and desires of the body.
Being ungrounded. The space cadet. Things that aren’t based
in reality.
You cannot depend on your
eyes when your imagination is
out of focus.
MarkTwain
Love and desire are the spirit’s
wings to great deeds.
Goethe
I know of no more encouraging
fact than the unquestionable
ability of man to elevate his life
by conscious endeavor.
Henry DavidThoreau
Scully:Another Bermuda
Triangle?
Mulder:It’s more like a wrinkle
in time..
The X-Files
He who has imagination
without learning has wings but
no feet.
Horace
You see things as they are and
ask‘Why’?
I dream things as they never
were and ask‘Why not’?
George Bernard Shaw
And I said,oh that I had wings
like a dove! For then would I fly
away,and be at rest.
The Bible
Aries 5

<<<PAGE 29>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
6
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SQUARE BRIGHTLY LIGHTED ON ONE
SIDE
Commentary: ‘A Square Brightly Lighted on One Side’ is a Symbol
of containment, walls and boundaries. A four-sided structure can
lead to feeling contained, boxed in, trapped or claustrophobic in
a place or situation. However, the ‘Square’ of this Symbol is not
completely walled in; it is being lit up ‘On One Side’, which shows
there are solutions and a way out. It indicates creative solutions
are at hand, if one will turn their attention to that possibility.
Oracle: In the situation facing you there’s a need to not concern
yourself too much with one side of an issue, even though you
may feel boxed in with little sign of resolution. Look around with
a positive, problem–solving attitude, and apply simple, active
solutions. There is a way out of your dilemma, although at first
it may not be very obvious. It is important not to surrender to
frustrations and limitations. As an exercise, try drawing an image
of a square with one side not drawn in. Label each of the sides with
a part of the problem that makes you feel trapped and constricted.
What part of your problem, or the solution, could you write in
the fourth ‘Brightly Lighted’ side? What are your possibilities for
free movement in this situation? There is a ‘Lighted’ illumination
and a solution if you turn your attention to it. Moving towards that
‘Light’ and refusing to be limited can lead to a sense of freedom
and security to do what you need to do. Open a window, turn
on a light or open the curtains. Relinquishing the experience of
“bouncing off the walls” will most likely bring you to the place
where you belong and the answers that you seek.
Keywords: Illuminated solutions that provide ways out of tight
situations. Having to put up walls to protect or defend versus
taking down the barriers. Putting all your eggs in one basket.
Feeling fully contained. Walls and fences. Boxes. Understanding
the borders of one’s activities. Looking for stabilization. Lighting
up dark corners. Sunshine. Stepping outside the square or feeling
there is no square. Moving out. Windows and doors. Rubik’s
Cube.
The Caution: Surrendering, feeling trapped. Seeing only one
side. Bouncing around, feeling like there’s no way out. Internal
struggles that prevent seeing solutions. Not acknowledging
or expressing true feelings. Desperately wanting to escape
tight situations. Fear of ambush. Fear of attack from behind.
Claustrophobia. Padded cells. Painting oneself into a corner.
Fresh activity is the only means
of overcoming adversity.
JohannWolfgangVon Goethe
Conformity is the jailer of
freedom and the enemy of
growth.
John F.Kennedy
Within yourself deliverance
must be searched for,because
each man makes his own
prison.
Sir Edwin Arnold
A man will be imprisoned
in a room with a door that’s
unlocked and opens inwards,as
long as it does not occur to him
to pull rather than push.
LudwigWittgenstein
Room Service? Send up a larger
room.
Groucho Marx
There comes a time in a man’s
life when to get where he has
to go–if there are no doors or
windows,he walks through a
wall.
Bernard Malamud
Light can penetrate dark,but
dark can’t penetrate light.
Kryon
It’s futile to gaze at the world
through a car window.
Albert Einstein
Aries 6

<<<PAGE 30>>>
ARIES
E
7
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN SUCCESSFULLY EXPRESSING
HIMSELF IN TWO WORLDS AT ONCE
Commentary: ‘A Man Successfully Expressing Himself in Two
Worlds at Once’ shows someone having the ability to be versatile
and adaptable. When operating in ‘Two Worlds’, one’s life may
seem divided with divergent responsibilities, needs and urges.
As this image implies that this person is ‘Successfully Expressing
Himself’, it shows that this is a time when it is possible, and
probably necessary, to cope with separate or diverse areas of
life.
Oracle: You have the ability, or the challenge, to shift your focus
from one thing to another when it is necessary. There is also the
drive, determination and focus not to run out of energy. However,
there is a need to be careful not to scatter your energies, as
this may lead to wasting time and losing valuable opportunities
for growth. Remember to be versatile and adaptable. There is
often the need for a form of balance between the emotional,
spiritual and material arenas. It’s through being clear and true
to the difference between these two areas, these ‘Two Worlds’,
that great things can be achieved. For instance, one can have
a “straight” job during the day, and be doing something really
unusual during the rest of the time, or live between two homes,
two cities, two relationships, etc. On another level, there could
be a realization of operating on the physical, more everyday level
of your life whilst having messages coming through from more
spiritual realms. You can be successful in anything you undertake
now, as long as you are happy with the compromises that may
be asked of both you and others and the splitting up of areas of
your life. Are you enjoying the best of both ‘Worlds’?
Keywords: Integrating the spiritual with the material. Balancing
things. Doing juggling acts. Moving through people’s lives and
social stratas. Translations of words and thoughts from one area
of life to another. Having separate family situations. Living a
dual life. Being adaptable. Moonlighting. Alternate realities.
Shifting focus when necessary. Versatility. Looking elsewhere.
The Caution: Fooling yourself that you can be all things to
different people, but eventually failing in one or both. Exhaustion
through trying to achieve too much. Deception, if allegiances are
not clear. Infidelity and fickleness. Scattering of interests with
little being achieved. Bigamy. Two-faced. Lies and masquerades.
Feeling like one doesn’t truly fit in anywhere. Not being able to
stop.
Think like a man of action,and
act like a man of thought.
Henri L.Bergson
I’ve been trying for some time to
develop a lifestyle that doesn’t
require my presence.
GaryTrudeau
Any woman who has a career
and a family automatically
develops something in the
way of two personalities,
like two sides of a dollar bill,
each different in design...her
problem is to keep one from
draining the life from the other.
Ivy Baker Priest
There are no elements so
diverse that they cannot be
joined in the heart of a man.
Jean Giraudoux
I’m happy when I’m juggling,
but I feel like I’ve gone from,like,
3 balls to 10 bowling balls.But,
that’s a good problem.I don’t
really have a complaint about
that.
Kirstie Alley
It is the nature of ambition to
make men liars and cheats,to
hide the truth in their breasts,
and show,like jugglers,another
thing in their mouths.
Sallust
Aries 7

<<<PAGE 31>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
8
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN’S HAT WITH STREAMERS
BLOWN BY THE EAST WIND
Commentary: ‘A Woman’s Hat With Streamers Blown By the East
Wind’. The ‘East Wind’ often implies messages or forces coming
in seemingly from out of the blue. These messages could be about
spirit or spiritual teachings. There’s a degree of gentleness here
and adaptability to external forces. Eastern philosophies can come
to mind as a way of thinking through this experience. Indeed,
some of the oriental systems of thought may play a major part
in this situation.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, you may feel as though you’re
being blown a little off course from what you originally set out to
do. This can happen even more if you or someone you’re dealing
with can’t make up their mind, or are constantly shifting their
perspective. There’s a need to adjust continually to the direction
of outside forces. Shifts of mind and attitude may happen as a
result or may, indeed, need to happen. Any changes are best
greeted and considered playfully and lightly. Allow wisdom to
lead you to new and different solutions, but be wary of acting
superficially. Look to see if your mind keeps changing course and
blowing you off center. If you do lose your way temporarily, be
assured that you can be steered back onto the right course with
just a little contemplation on the direction your life is meant to be
taking you. Take your time, be patient and act with the feminine
forces of gentility, grace and dignity. This Symbol indicates that
you are somewhat protected from the more disturbing elements of
your situation. Is someone running after something or someone,
trying to retrieve it whilst it just keeps being ‘Blown’ further
away? In what direction is this ‘Wind’ blowing you?
Keywords: Attuning oneself through Eastern philosophies.
Protective guidance. Balloons and hot-air ballooning. Compasses.
Weather vanes and wind chimes. East meets west. Being adaptable
to the moment. The winds of time and change. Shifts in the
‘Wind’ bringing shifts in attitude or direction. Hats, scarves,
streamers.
The Caution: Only accepting solutions that satisfy selfish or
social needs. Insincere and easily blown around. Fickleness.
Being tossed around by momentary patterns in the “weather”.
Conflicting ideals. Forgetting things in a moment. Being easily
distracted. Changing course midstream. Being blown off the
path, thereby losing ones center or way. Breezes that disturb
ones equilibrium. Losinng yourself in other’s opinions.
I am a feather for each wind
that blows.
William Shakespeare
Our plans miscarry because
they have no aim.When you
don’t know what harbor you’re
aiming for,no wind is the right
wind.
Seneca
Like a kite cut from the string,
lightly the soul of my youth has
taken flight.
IshikawaTakuboku
Distracted by what is far
away,he does not see his nose.
Malagasy Proverb
If the winds of fortune are
temporarily blowing against
you,remember that you can
harness them and make them
carry you toward your definite
purpose through the use of your
imagination.
Napolean Hill
If you pay nervous attention
to other people’s opinions,
maneuver to obtain their
indulgence and to stand high
in their esteem,you will be
whisked about in their winds
and you will lose yourself.
Jo Coubert
A great wind is blowing
and that gives you either
imagination or a headache.
Catherine II
Aries 8

<<<PAGE 32>>>
ARIES
E
9
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SEER GAZES INTENTLY INTO A
CRYSTAL BALL BEFORE HIM
Commentary: ‘A Seer Gazes Intently Into a Crystal Ball Before
Him’ shows the talent, the need and the tools for intense focus and
concentration. The ‘Seer’ sees many things as he ‘Gazes Intently’,
looking for clues through a narrow focus in the ‘Crystal Ball’.
Using a ‘Crystal Ball’ is his method of receiving information from
the world of spirit. By looking deeply into a situation, images can
form and meaning can be revealed. This enhances the ability to
observe things that others may miss.
Oracle: In your situation the whole picture is probably right
before you but you may need help in interpreting its meaning.
With a little concentrated effort, you will be able to see things
more clearly. Find or retrieve information and clues by really
looking at the structure of things. What are you doing and how
are you focusing towards what you really want? The more you
narrow your ‘Gaze’, and the more you trust in your own intuition,
the sharper and clearer the focus will become. What is your
unconscious mind trying to tell you? Find something to focus
on, something beautiful, illuminating or inspiring in some way.
Consider what messages your psyche is trying to bring you. If you
have a dream, write it down. Drawing this Symbol may show an
ability to see things ahead of their time. Tools of divination such
as crystal balls, tarot cards, the runes, the I Ching, the Sabian
Symbols or anything you have at your disposal will help you
find the answers. However, there may be a need for caution if
you are constantly seeking answers from tarot cards, astrology,
clairvoyants, etc. Perhaps you should know when to call a halt,
examining your own goals rather than merely getting answers
from other people. Whatever, be patient and have a good,
long, insightful look. The steadier your ‘Gaze’ the more will be
revealed.
Keywords: Flashes of inspiration. Tuning in and looking within
for answers. Creative visualizations. Aura readings. Cutting
through irrelevant messages. Looking carefully at structure.
Seeking perfection. Clairvoyance. Illumination and deep insights.
Looking ahead to see the signs.
The Caution: Confused by literal meanings. Not seeing the
symbolic message. Always looking this way and that, not at the
center. Getting lost in the big picture. Daydreaming and ignoring
what’s really going on. Obsessing over what may happen. Needing
to know what’s coming up. Being impatient.
The only limits are,as always,
those of vision.
James Broughton
We are always in search of
the redeeming formula,the
crystallizing thought.
Etty Hillesum
People who see a drawing in
the“NewYorker”will think
automatically that it’s funny
because it is a cartoon.If they
see it in a museum,they think it
is artistic;and if they find it in a
fortune cookie they think it is a
prediction.
Saul Steinberg
Everyone sees the unseen in
proportion to the clarity of his
heart,and that depends upon
how much he has polished it.
Whoever has polished it more
sees more — more unseen
forms become manifest to him.
Jalal-Uddin Rumi
Refrain from asking what is
going to happen tomorrow,
and every day that fortune
grants you,count as gain.
Horace
It is said that the present is
pregnant with the future.
Voltaire
The most pathetic person in
the world is someone who has
sight,but has no vision.
Helen Keller
Aries 9

<<<PAGE 33>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
10
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A TEACHER GIVES NEW SYMBOLIC
FORMS TO TRADITIONAL IMAGES
Commentary:‘ATeacherGivesNewSymbolicFormstoTraditional
Images’. This Symbol shows someone who can take a thing or a
situation and transform and update it. The ‘Traditional Images’
can be ideas, objects, icons, beliefs; things we are familiar with.
That a ‘Teacher Gives New Symbolic Forms’ shows the ability to
restructure, reinterpret and present them more in tune with the
times. It indicates a need for a fresh and revitalized perspective
on things. This is what Marc Edmund Jones and Elsie Wheeler did
with the Sabian Symbol “experiment”. This book has taken the
Symbols a step further, giving them further depth and insight.
Oracle: In the situation facing you there’s a need to analyze
and perhaps rewrite what has been observed and learned
in the traditional roles we live out. Things may need a new
interpretation to bring them up to speed with today’s thinking.
Someone in this situation may have truly original ideas, but there’s
a possibility of holding these back, feeling it has all been done
before. The message here is to allow yourself to be creative and
look for modern answers, seeing things in a different light or
from a different angle. This may lead to realizations you have
never even considered or imagined. Bringing out something new
will revitalize your situation and affect those around you. This
can bring new understandings about people and the way things
work. There could be a revisioning of how one sees something
like marriage, work, relationships, education etc. Sometimes this
requires one to be daring, to “step outside the box”. Be prepared
to take a different stance or look at things from a new and fresh
perspective. Don’t stick to limitations, either your own or those
others place on you. You may have to make a stand against those
in a higher or more exalted position that think they know more
than you—perhaps they don’t.
Keywords: New dimensions breaking old thought forms or
behavior. Quantum science. Innovation and re-creation. Working
with educational tools. Finding new inspiration. Being “ahead of
one’s time”. New-age consciousness. Ideas out of the past for the
future. Sticking one’s neck out. Rewriting the book.
The Caution: Rejecting old ideas because they are old instead
of reforming them. Throwing things of worth out, without
examining them. Having little respect for things that are really
worthwhile or traditional. Sticking with the tried and true, no
matter what. Thinking that no one will be interested in your
ideas. Heresy. Dogma.
It is better to fail in originality
than to succeed in imitation.
Herman Melville
Originality does not consist
in saying what no one has
ever said before,but in saying
exactly what you think yourself.
James Stephens
Adam was the only man who,
when he said a good thing,
knew that nobody had said it
before him.
MarkTwain
It is the fate of new truths to
begin as heresies and end as
superstitions.
Thomas H.Huxley
Half my life is an act of revision.
John Irving
Civilization had too many
rules for me,so I did my best to
rewrite them.
Bill Cosby
Great innovators and original
thinkers and artists attract
the wrath of mediocrities as
lightning rods draw the flashes.
Theodor Reik
I have for instance among my
purchases ...several original
Mona Lisas and all painted
(according to the signature) by
the great artist Kodak.
Spike Milligan
Aries 10

<<<PAGE 34>>>
ARIES
E
11
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OR THE RULER OF ONE’S COUNTRY
Commentary: ‘The President’ or the ‘Ruler’ pictures a person
who’s in control, has a sense of authority and is called upon to
do the right thing for his people, his ‘Country’ and indeed, his
position or office. This ‘President’ or ‘Ruler’ has the right, and the
duty, to call the shots in their territory or sphere of operation.
Oracle: This Symbol says that it’s time to take charge, and to
expand your base of operations. There may be a need to take
control and command respect from others by showing that you
have the confidence to make your own decisions. This is your
opportunity to prove that you have the integrity and the necessary
energy to get things done. It’s also a great time to bring a sense
of order and discipline into your life – physically, spiritually or
emotionally. It is important to grasp the boundaries of your
influence and power as this will lead to a strong and renewed
sense of self. Who’s in charge of operations in this situation—is
it you or another? What can you do to strengthen your position
and show that you can be relied upon to get the job done? If
someone is trying to take your sense of individuality and power
away through being bossy and in control, what can be done to
reclaim your authority? Giving your power away to someone can
lead to being taken advantage of in many ways. The undermining
of one’s authority can lead to a loss of position and self-respect.
Stay in a relationship only if it gives you a good sense of yourself.
Whoever is involved in this situation should wield their power
in a careful and thoughtful way. There may be a need to accept
people’s recognition of you as a person in control of your own
life and destiny. Doing this with dignity can lead to a whole new
sense of self, position and personal power.
Keywords: Developing willpower. Inner power, discipline
and integrity. Discipline of thoughts, emotions and actions.
Leadership, power and ability along with their responsibilities.
Accepting responsibility for one’s actions. “Calling the shots”.
Rulers, presidents, leaders. Taking charge. The need for loyal
subjects. Being voted in. The democratic process.
The Caution: Taking control. Lording it over everyone. Being
overbearing. Not allowing others to be in charge of their own lives,
health or situation. Egotistical and self-centered. Undermining
others through a lack of self-awareness or confidence. Being
larger than life. Dictators and tyrants. Military Governments.
What government is the best?
That which teaches us to
govern ourselves.
Goethe
No man is free who is not a
master of himself.
Epictetus
He is free...who knows how
to keep in his own hands the
power to decide.
Salvador De Madriaga
To put the world in order,we
must first put the nation in order;
to put the nation in order,we
must put the family in order;to
put the family in order,we must
cultivate our personal life;and
to cultivate our personal life,we
must first set our hearts right.
Confucius
He that would govern others
first should be the master of
himself.
Philip Massinger
He is not fit to command others
that cannot command himself.
Proverb
I am,indeed,a king,for I know
how to rule myself.
Pietro Aretino
It is a strange desire to seek
power and to lose liberty.
Francis Bacon
Aries 11

<<<PAGE 35>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
12
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FLOCK OF WILD GEESE
Commentary: The ‘Flock of Wild Geese’ is a beautifully inspiring
image of brotherhood and Aquarian ideals. Watching them fly
can inspire feelings of group cohesion and the beauty of natural
rhythms. The ‘Flock’ shows the need to join with others in a
journey or a quest. Remember to take your cue from the ‘Wild
Geese’ – when they fly in formation, they take turns in leading
the way. Likewise, when one gets tired or sick, another takes
the lead.
Oracle: Whilst this is a Symbol of working together with others,
be wary of losing your sense of individuality. There may be a
feeling of wanting to leave behind previous life constraints, to
be able to spread your wings, to seek freedom from difficulties.
However, there’s a need to take note of “seasonal” variations
that are happening around you. Obviously there is a time to
“fly” and a time to relax and recover. You can’t always be on the
go; you must look after your needs for nourishment and sleep.
‘Geese’ are known for forming lifelong partnerships, so marriage
or partnership may indeed be a consideration in this situation.
However, it can sometimes be hard to “ground” relationships.
This Symbol is very much about brotherhood, respect and getting
along with others. Setting out with those of like mind can lead to
an expanded view of life or indeed a whole new adventure. Still,
continually taking off on tangents with others whilst you could
be making more permanent and loyal commitments to the long
term can really test relationships. Remember to be aware of your
responsibilities, to both yourself and others in the group. Know
that there is support out there for you; just ask.
Keywords: Aquarian ideals of brotherhood. Attunement to
planetary rhythms. Spirit liberated from matter. Wanting to take
off by one’s self, but not being able to. Focused group activity
and support. Group mentality, action and agreement. Intuition
and telepathy. Choreography. Camaraderie. “Honking” to egg
each other on. Flying in the slipstream. Responses to seasonal
changes. Migrating at the right times. Travelling. Herds, gangs.
broods. Flying in formation.
TheCaution: Following the leader without knowing where one’s
going. Never knowing where to land, or where to ground oneself.
Wild goose chases. Not recognizing the brotherhood in humanity.
Losing a sense of individual identity. Going off in the wrong
direction. Being lost in the crowd. Beiing one of a gaggle.
Birds of a feather flock together.
Saying
There is a destiny that makes us
brothers,No one goes his way
alone;All that we send into the
lives of others,Comes back into
our own.
Edwin Markham
I met a hundred men going
to Delhi and everyone is my
brother.
Indian Saying
A goose flies by a chart which
the Royal Geographical Society
could not mend.
OliverWendell Holmes
Don’t refuse to go on an
occasional wild goose chase.
That’s what wild geese are
made for.
Henry S.Haskins
Cross in a crowd and the
crocodile won’t eat you.
Malagasy Proverb
Likeness causes liking.
Romanian Proverb
Not the cry,but the flight of the
wild duck,leads the flock to fly
and follow.
Chinese Proverb
Why do you lead me a wild
goose chase?
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
Aries 12

<<<PAGE 36>>>
ARIES
E
13
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BOMB WHICH FAILED TO EXPLODE
IS NOW SAFELY HIDDEN FROM
DISCOVERY
Commentary:‘ABombWhichFailedtoExplode’showspotentially
explosive energies are around which haven’t gone off yet that may
now be ‘Safely’ defused. Things are “safe” from detection, but
dangerous elements are possibly still within. Handling ‘A Bomb’
needs to be done with extreme care and caution. That the ‘Bomb’
is ‘Now Safely Hidden From Discovery’ shows it’s still potentially
explosive, but has somehow been made safe. The duration of the
apparent calm depends on whether the “defusing” is done with
attention to all of the details involved, no matter how small.
Oracle: Has this situation been defused or is still likely to
‘Explode’? Unexploded ‘Bombs’ can be like grenades – ready
to go off at any moment, spraying everyone with shrapnel. The
‘Bomb’ is often something of an emotional nature, but can also be
the suppression of a truth that has emotional side effects. There
may be time to eliminate the impending explosion before it is
discovered, bringing relief and release. If, however, things remain
charged up, the result could be depression or internal anger and
calling in the “bomb squad” may be necessary. This could mean
the help of friends, family, and assistants. Calling in your own
emotional, mental or spiritual ‘Bomb’ squad allows you to take
control of your emotional nature. If a ‘Bomb’ is ‘Discovered’, it may
point to the guilty party who will have to explain their behavior.
Did you plant this ‘Bomb’ or did someone else? Take time to reflect
on rash emotional decisions or situations that, if ‘Exploded’, could
damage much more than was intended. Getting everything under
control and safely out of the way will reveal how you can handle
things. Act with integrity. People involved can learn a lot from
how they react, especially when under pressure.
Keywords: Pressure valves. Getting away with something.
Tantrums and frustration. Tempers that simmer. Explosive
behavior. Bombs, explosions. Sudden and forceful events.
Intelligence organizations, CIA, FBI, ASIO, etc. Valuable lessons of
self-restraint. Relief from problems. Discharging nervous energy.
Security checks. Last minute escapes.
The Caution: Suppressing stress or illness. Doing inappropriate
thingsandthinkingthesecretsafe.Repressingemotions.Undefined
anger. Pressure cooker energy that needs to be released slowly.
Explosions damaging more than expected. Activists. Deception
behind one’s back. Clash of ideals. Terrorism.
Anger will never disappear so
long as thoughts of resentment
are cherished in the mind.
Anger will disappear just as
soon as thoughts of resentment
are forgotten.
Buddha
How much more grievous are
the consequences of anger than
the causes of it.
Marcus Aurelius
“I lose my temper,but it’s all
over in a minute,”said the
student.“So is the hydrogen
bomb,”I replied.“But think
of the damage it produces!”
George Sweeting
I do not like this word“bomb.”It
is not a bomb.It is a device that
is exploding.
Jacques le Blanc—French
ambassador to New Zealand
on Greenpeace’s Rainbow
Warrior bombing.
As in an explosion,I would
erupt with all the wonderful
things I saw and understood
in this world.
Boris Pasternak
When the habitually even-
tempered suddenly fly into a
passion,that explosion is apt
to be more impressive than the
outburst of the most violent
amongst us.
Margery Allingham
Aries 13

<<<PAGE 37>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
14
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SERPENT COILING NEAR A MAN
AND A WOMAN
Commentary: ‘A Serpent Coiling Near a Man and a Woman’
symbolizes the story of the “temptation” of Adam and Eve in the
Garden of Eden. The ‘Serpent’ offered Adam and Eve the gift of
self-knowledge. However, this “knowledge” also revealed to them
that they were naked and that this was sinful. The ‘Serpent’ was
said to have brought them both knowledge and guilt. The “snake”
can be symbolic of anything that induces fear or negativity into
a situation. On the other hand, what the “snake” symbolizes
can bring a healing and a profound sense of, or need for, self-
knowledge. This Symbol can show the celebration of the physical
body and the enjoyment of another through all of the senses.
Oracle: Something or someone may be coming between two
people. ‘A Serpent’ is shown ‘Coiling Near a Man and a Woman’;
this can be a third person or some kind of threat. It can bring
jealousy, resentment, distrust or separation. What comes between
people may be an idea or a belief system, such as the fear of
God. It may be some insight or knowledge that has come to
light; it may be another person or a lover. Temptation, fear and
passion can all too easily get in the way of any relationship, old or
new. It can sometimes be difficult to tell exactly what’s coming
between people; it could be an emotion, psychological condition
or memory. The ‘Serpent’ in this situation is not necessarily in a
threatening pose, yet it can still induce a sense of fear or tension
because of assumptions and prejudice. Snakes by their very nature
don’t have to do anything to be intimidating—they arouse fear,
uneasiness and other, more extreme, reactions by their mere
presence. Maybe one needs to let go of inhibitions in order to
find new depths and ways of relating. If the fear of the “snake”
were to disappear, would you then be able to return to your own
“Garden of Eden”? Alone, or as a couple?
Keywords: Enticement. Allurement. Revealing archetypal
knowledge that may not be “socially acceptable”. Temptations.
The Adam and Eve story. Jealousy. Sexual instincts. Life and death
issues. Relating based on control. Kundalini energy. Realizing
polarity. Individuation. Eating the Apple. The “knowledge of good
and evil”. Having one’s eyes opened. Marking one’s territory.
TheCaution: Feeling guilty. Being afraid to express one’s feelings.
Basic instincts and sexual energy. The fear of knowledge, secret
or otherwise. Using sexuality as a control device. Disgust or
distrust of the body. Sexually transmitted diseases. Hiding nudity
or sexuality. Being thrown out of paradise.
Religion has done love a great
service by making it a sin.
Anatole France
It was from the rind of
one apple tasted that the
knowledge of good and evil as
two twins cleaving together
leaped forth into the world.
John Milton
This desire to govern a woman–
it lies very deep,and men and
women must fight it together
before they shall enter the
garden.
E.M.Forster
Forbidden fruit is sweet.
Traditional Proverb
Adam was human;he didn’t
want the apple for the apple’s
sake;he wanted it because it
was forbidden.
MarkTwain
Adam and Eve had many
advantages,but the principal
one was that they escaped
teething.
MarkTwain
There are several good
protections against temptation,
but the most popular is
cowardice.
MarkTwain
Do not bite at the bait of
pleasure until you know that
there is no hook.
Thomas Jefferson
Aries 14

<<<PAGE 38>>>
ARIES
E
15
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INDIAN WEAVING A BLANKET IN
THE LIGHT OF THE SETTING SUN
Commentary: ‘An Indian Weaving a Blanket’ shows that people
need to take time out to do the things that aren’t particularly
exciting or rewarding on a large scale, but do, however, provide
feelings of contentment, warmth, safety and security. In ‘Weaving
the Blanket’, the ‘Indian’ not only creates something that is useful,
but weaves into it images of their life and history. Often the
patterns and pictures woven into it easily identify the tribe this
‘Blanket’ comes from. Being ‘In the Light of the Setting Sun’,
there may be a feeling of the energy of the light, the ‘Sun’, fading,
leaving little time to achieve what needs to be done.
Oracle: By practicing our skills in an artful way there can be
a celebration and remembrance of the experiences that led to
this moment. Doing one’s chores with enjoyment leads to inner
contentment and a sense of self. In contemplation or meditation
one can find peace, relaxation and a feeling of meaning and
accomplishment. Taking time to do the job well is important,
as is reverence for those things in your possession. Even small
contributions in life are important and your integrity should not
be compromised. A lot of effort goes into ‘Weaving a Blanket’ and
there may be no worthwhile shortcuts to its completion. Do you
need to bring many strands from different areas or parts of your
life together? What materials are available to you? It’s best to relax
into your activities. Take time to enjoy the tranquility of dusk,
possibly catching sight of a sunset. Conditions will change with
time and you can get back to more exciting ventures. Remember
to”weave your dream”.
Keywords: The fabric of one’s being. Traditional pastimes
and skills. Weaving security and independence. Patience and
gentle handcrafting. Stories, especially those handed down.
Tales and traditions. Consideration of one’s unique history.
Weaving, spinning looms. The warp and weft of life. One’s life
story—past and present. Being focused on one’s tasks. Colours,
dyes. Threads.
The Caution: Underestimating skills of self-expression in
comparison with intellectual skills. Allowing dull routines to
overcome. Feeling one hasn’t got much to contribute. Inability
to apply to routine and necessary tasks. Being too “full-time”
about one’s work. Feeling insecure no matter what the situation.
Selling off one’s integrity. Finding that it’s too late in the day to
get anything done. Not knowing when to stop.
Man was made for Joy and
Woe,
And when this we rightly know,
Thro theWorld we safely go.
Joy andWoe are woven fine,
A clothing for the soul divine.
William Blake
We sleep,but the loom of life
never stops and the pattern
which was weaving when the
sun went down is weaving
when it comes up tomorrow.
HenryWard Beecher
Humankind has not woven
the web of life.We are but one
thread within it.Whatever
we do to the web,we do to
ourselves.All things are bound
together.All things connect.
Chief Seattle
For the American Indian,the
ability of all creatures to share
in the process of ongoing
creation makes all things
sacred.
Paula Gunn Allen
Life is what we make it,always
has been,always will be.
Grandma Moses
America is woven of many
strands.I would recognise
them and let it so remain.Our
fate is to become one,and yet
many.This is not prophecy,but
description.
Ralph Gleeson
Aries 15

<<<PAGE 39>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
16
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
BRIGHTLY CLAD BROWNIES
DANCING IN THE WARM DYING
LIGHT
Commentary: ‘Brightly Clad Brownies Dancing in the Warm
Dying Light’ is a wonderful and rather mischievous image.
‘Brownies’ are nature spirits that come to help us with our
work. The concept of ‘Brownies’ has existed in many cultures
for a long time. They lived with humans and sometimes they
were said to live in the attic. They often helped the humans in
the kitchen; they got the fire going by blowing on it, took care
of the human’s children and saw that the food was properly
cooked. But nowadays, with the use of electric machines and
lights, ‘Brownies’ are disappearing more and more. However it
is said some of them still try to stay around. Although mostly
associated with housework, we can call on their help in many
different ways. Nature spirits are often around us, particularly if
we believe in them, welcome them and trust in their presence.
They are ‘Dancing in the Warm Dying Light’ inferring that while
intuitive powers are at a real high, the available physical energy
is not; it is sunset, and the close of the day.
Oracle: You may be feeling tired and in need of help to get
everything, or even anything, done. Have faith, and call on any
assistance you can as this Symbol implies that you will surely
receive it. This Symbol shows that you are being guided and
protected. Friends or people may arrive unexpectedly to help
out at the “last moment”. Sometimes the people who turn up to
help are “strangers”. Trust that things will be okay even if things
feel “too late in the day”. Of course, you could be a ‘Brownie’
for someone else, assisting others when they need it. How about
‘Dancing’? It can refresh and revitalize the spirit and invite love
and light into your life.
Keywords: Reveling in nature. Believing in guides. Fairies and
nature spirits. The wonder and awe of nature. The setting sun.
Last minute preparations before evening. The psychic magic of
dusk. Light that dances. Unseen guardians. Receiving guidance
and help. Seeing the invisible. Help at the last minute. Fairy
godmothers. Questions of: what is the “real” world?
The Caution: Self-delusions. Missing the true picture of what’s
happening in the “real-world”. Losing the plot. Relying on
others, including angels, nature spirits, etc., instead of yourself.
Neglecting responsibilities. Crying wolf. Using people.
The worst thing about work
in the house or home is that
whatever you do is destroyed,
laid waste or eaten within
twenty-four hours.
Lady Kasluck
Housework is what a woman
does that nobody notices unless
she hasn’t done it.
Evan Esar
Housekeeping ain’t no joke.
Louisa May Alcott
Few tasks are more like the
torture of Sisyphus than
housework,with its endless
repetition:the clean becomes
soiled;the soiled is made clean,
over and over,day after day.
Simone de Beauvoir
At worst,a house unkempt
cannot be so distressing as a life
unlived.
Rose Macaulay
For the elemental creatures
go about my table to and fro.
William ButlerYeats
All of us,at certain moments of
our lives,need to take advice
and receive help from other
people.
Alexis Carrel
To the man who himself strives
earnestly,God also lends a
helping hand.
Aeschylus
Aries 16

<<<PAGE 40>>>
ARIES
E
17
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO PRIM SPINSTERS SITTING
TOGETHER IN SILENCE
Commentary: ‘Two Prim Spinsters’ are shown ‘Sitting Together
in Silence’. This Symbol shows people that know and understand
each other, without the need for chatter. Feelings of contentment
can come in time spent with a special friend, someone who you
feel completely at ease with. A real sense of understanding of
what the other is feeling and thinking can be a central quality of
strong companionship. Of course, the ‘Two Spinsters’ may not
be together through choice, but rather through life situations.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, remember that it is easy
to become socially isolated when you hold on to conservative,
judgmental, or moral ideas. Ask yourself if there is a select,
restricted group with whom you are associating. Look for any
opportunities to open you up to deeper and further levels of
communication. Be wary that a false sense of security doesn’t
isolate you from change and growth. People don’t want to
talk to each other if they feel their relationship has become
boring, with nowhere to go and without much of a future. If
people have nothing to say to each other should they spend
their time together? Unresolved issues may be too difficult to
discuss, they can lie beneath the surface causing fear, isolation
and loneliness. ‘Silence’ or quietness can conceal frustration or
feelings of sacrifice and loss. If there are no children in their
lives and they are said to be ‘Spinsters’, unmarried women, is
that an issue? There is an old-fashioned belief which says: It is
important to our friends to believe that we are unreservedly
frank or honest with them and important to friendship that we
are not. That may have suited conditions in the past, but now we
have to be more open, honest and communicative, with others
and with ourselves.
Keywords: The need to loosen up emotional blockages. The
struggle to hold onto one’s original identity. Compromise because
of social expectations. Meditations that communicate. Exclusive
relationships. Relationships that have a quiet “knowing”.
Dignified silence. Inner withdrawal. Communicating through
body language.
TheCaution: Emotionalisolation.Refusingtoacceptrelationship.
Pretending to be someone that one is not. Disapproval of younger,
more vital energies. Being fussy and judgmental. Chattering that
is not conducive to growth or true relating. Gossip. Difficulty
in communicating. Being shutoff, or shutdown. The loss of joy
and spontaneity.
Silence gives consent.
Pope BonifaceVIII
Silence is one of the hardest
arguments to refute.
Josh Billings
When you have nothing to say,
say nothing.
Charles Caleb Colton
Wisdom is knowing when to
speak your mind and when to
mind your speech.
Evangel
The best mirror is an old friend.
Proverb
Television has proved that
people will look at anything
rather than each other.
Ann Landers
For the friendship of two,the
patience of one is required.
Indian Proverb
Good men are scarce.
Proverb
We are growing serious,and let
me tell you,that’s the next step
to being dull.
Joseph Addison
The loneliest woman in the
world is a woman without a
close woman friend.
George Santayana
Aries 17
