
<<<PAGE 1>>>
360º
360 DEGREES 
 O F  W I S D O M :
THE SABIAN ORACLE
by Lynda Hill

<<<PAGE 2>>>
HOW TO USE THE SABIAN
ORACLE
There are several ways to use this book.
• Shuffle the cards and look up the Symbol in the book
• Think of a number between 1 and 360 and look up the relevant
page number.
• Open the book at random.
• Look up the Symbols for your birthday in the Birthday Table.
• Using your Birthchart investigate the Symbols for any planet or
point in the chart.
Like all Oracles,
whichever answer you find is the one you need.
May the Symbols
speak to you!

<<<PAGE 3>>>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It has taken 10 years for this book to evolve. I am incredibly grateful that I can stand on
the shoulders of giants such as Marc Edmund Jones, Dane Rudhyar and Elsie Wheeler.
So many people have helped me on my journey. Thank you to all those who believed in
the work, encouraged me or assisted me along the way.
Special thanks go to:
Richard Hill and his partner Sue Davis. Richard and I shared our lives for 20 years and
continue to be supportive of each other as we enter an exciting new period of our lives.
My daughter Jess—my wonderful editor and sounding board in the writing of this book.
Her brilliance has taught me many things; one of them being how to be a better writer.
My son Joel, the coolest person I know on the planet. He did more than his fair share of
the cooking whilst I sat at the computer.
Deirdre Hill, for so many things.
My father Ken Rigby, who for many years was an astrologer and an Edgar Cayce healer.
Alice Kashuba and Dale O’Brien, wonderful students of the Sabian Symbols, who were
there from the very beginning of my sojourns into the United States.
Gary Rabideau and Claudia Lapp for doing the Birthday Index and being great mates.
Elizabeth Paul Avedon for designing the Oracle cards, believing so strongly in my work
and giving me the step up the ladder that I needed at just the right time.
Paul Smyth for doing the wonderful layout and design.
Philip Sedgwick for being so special—such an incredible mind and inspiration.
Graham Dawson and Stephanie Johnson—directors of Esoteric Technologies Pty Ltd., the
company behind Australia’s successful astrology software programs Solar Fire, Solar Maps,
Solar Writer and Solar Spark for their enthusiastic nudge that led me to write the Oracle.
Eben Weiss, Michael Lutin, Ray Merriman, Alan Oken, Georgina Haul, Judith Levy, Bob
and Diana Zoller, Rick Levine, Scott Davis, Vicki and Dennis Spanogle, Janis Watson, Ananda
Bagley, Linda Reid, Ben Cameron, Chrissie Eglem, Deborah Kennedy, Yasmin Boland, Jessica
Adams, Ian Mortimer, Ada Cumming, Val and Frank Budny, Diana Hunter, Richard Giles and
Susie, Randy and Brian Main, Rick and Angie Romero
And all the special people who’ve touched my life.

<<<PAGE 4>>>
360 Degrees Of Wisdom: The Sabian Oracle
This book is dedicated to Elsie Wheeler
First published in 1995 by Hill & Hill P/L
First Edition March 1995
Reprinted August 1995
Revised Edition December 1995
Special Edition May 2002
© Lynda Hill 2004
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either in part or in whole, may
be reproduced, transmitted, translated, or utilized in any form or by
any means without permission in writing from the author or publisher,
with the exception of brief passages, quoted in articles, reviews or for
personal use.
Layout and cover design by Paul Smyth
Contact details: Lynda Hill P.O. Box 172 AVALON 2107 Australia
Ph:(61 2)9918.9539 Fax:(61 2)9973.1453
email: lyndah@bigpond.com
http://www.sabiansymbols.com

<<<PAGE 5>>>
CONTENTS
Preface ............................................................................................ i
The Sabian Symbol Story................................................................ ii
My Journey With The Sabian Symbols ........................................ viii
Using The Cards............................................................................. x
How To Prepare Oracle Cards .................................................... xiv
Using The Birthday Tables ........................................................... xv
ARIES ............................................................................................. 1
TAURUS.........................................................................................31
GEMINI .........................................................................................61
CANCER........................................................................................91
LEO .............................................................................................121
VIRGO.........................................................................................151
LIBRA..........................................................................................181
SCORPIO.....................................................................................211
SAGITTARIUS..............................................................................241
CAPRICORN ...............................................................................271
AQUARIUS ..................................................................................301
PISCES.........................................................................................331
Appendix A: Birthday Tables ......................................................361

<<<PAGE 6>>>
i
PREFACE
Introduction
More and more people in this new era are seeing how magical and mystical life
can be. We are finding our way into much broader, enriching and rewarding levels.
So many of us are now exploring the spiritual aspects of our existence; observing our
lives, and the effects we have on the people around us and on planet earth. Life today
is increasingly complex, however, with so many decisions to make and puzzles to solve.
We hunger for meaning and guidance and often want and need answers to life’s many
questions—here and now.
As many of us already know, there are tools for discovering what’s going on, and why,
which help us to find our path. Throughout history successive generations have created
intuitive guidance tools that reflected the vibration of their culture and their times—the
I Ching in ancient China; the Runes in Scandinavia; the Tarot in early Europe.
Oracles have been ‘read’ from an incredible array of objects including stones, bones,
tea—leaves, coins, sticks, the backs of tortoise shells and cards. The word “oracle” comes
from the Latin word meaning “to pray”. It is also connected to the word for mouth. An
oracle is described in Webster’s Dictionary as being ‘a divine announcement’ and ‘the
medium by which a god reveals hidden knowledge or makes known the divine purpose’.
Further, it is said to be ‘an authoritative or wise statement or prediction’. In essence an
oracle is a tool that allows a conversation with divine forces. They give us signposts and
maps so that we can make better, more informed choices in life. In truth, we have the
answers to the questions we ask inside of us; however we often need the answers to
come through a vehicle outside of ourselves. Now we have the Sabian Oracle, which
gives us a direct route into issues that reflect our modern era.
Based on the Sabian Symbols, first created in 1925, and consisting of 360 answers,
the Sabian Oracle can be used to guide us through questions about our day—to—day
lives: work, relationships, health, spirituality etc. Using the Sabian Oracle will help
you to discover what’s going on and why, leading to deeper self—awareness. You are
able to make more informed choices and greatly enhance your life. It provides us with
a psychic and spiritual tool for deep guidance, insight and the ability to see into the
amazing occurrences and synchronicities that occur to us and happen around us. You
can ask questions about what your future holds, how to go about doing something, what
you need to know about a situation or the people involved, directions on your spiritual
path or you can use it to get a message for the day. They lead us out of the wilderness
into a place of greater self—determination, fulfillment and enjoyment. Using them also
widens and enlarges our psychic abilities and awareness and increases our attunement
with our intuitive depths.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
i­
The Sabian Symbol story
What are the Sabian Symbols?
The ancients divided up the sky, just like any other circle, into 360 degrees. They
assigned each of the 12 constellations (star signs or zodiac signs) 30 degrees each: 12
times 30 = 360. The Sabian Symbols are a set of 360 phrases of words that correspond
with each of the 360 degrees of the wheel of the zodiac, from Aries 1 to Pisces 30.
Consisting from as little as 2 words (Virgo 2: ‘A Harem’) to as many as 21 words (Taurus
5: ‘A Youthful Widow, Fresh and Soul—Cleansed From Grief, Kneels at an Open Grave
to Receive the Secret of Eternal Life), each one of these Symbols holds both a story
and a unique energy field of their own. These images hold meaning for those degrees
of the signs. Although the Symbols have their foundations in astrology, absolutely no
knowledge of astrology is needed to use them.
The Sabian Symbols were given birth in San Diego, California, in 1925 by Marc
Edmund Jones, a noted American astrologer and spiritualist and the gifted clairvoyant
Elsie Wheeler. Jones was interested to find a set of word images to go with every degree
of the zodiac. Elsie Wheeler was an extraordinary clairvoyant confined to a wheelchair
for most of her life. Jones chose Elsie Wheeler as his partner in this ‘experiment’ as she
had a remarkable ability to “see” messages, images and symbols. She used this talent
to help her clients, but was rather weary of the standard questions she received, such
as “when will I be rich?” and “when will I meet the love of my life?” She was eager to
take part as she believed that this was an opportunity to really contribute something
to astrology.
How Elsie and Marc brought through the Symbols
One day in San Diego in 1925 (unfortunately the date was not recorded) not far from
the harbor, astrologer Marc Edmund Jones assisted spiritualist—medium Elsie Wheeler
into his car. Elsie was afflicted with severe arthritis, making any movement very difficult
and most likely painful. Marc’s car made its way from the house on India Avenue where
Elsie lived up the sloping hills to Balboa Park. Exactly where in the park they worked
is not known. Marc Edmund Jones wrote that they found a place where they could be
surrounded by the vibrations of modern American life but would not be disturbed by
passers—by. Also, as Elsie was unable to walk, they could not be moved from the car.
Marc Edmund Jones wrote in his book ‘The Sabian Symbols in Astrology’ (first
published in 1953), “Miss Elsie Wheeler was very anxious to start… it was necessary
to provide uninterrupted hours, with a problem of inevitable fatigue to be taken into
account. She had to be carried, no others could be present and conditions in general had
to enable her to function in her accustomed manner. Balboa Park in San Diego offered
a spot where a driveway was a matter of a very few yards from one of the city’s busiest
traffic intersections, fortuitously meeting the necessity that work of this sort be done in
the turmoil of some metropolitan center or other unusually dense aggregation of people

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Preface
iii
active in the business of being. There was a screen of trees and bushes, and during the
day no one would show any interest in a car parked here for a few hours.”
Marc had a set of 360 3” x 5” cardboard cards that he had prepared. These were
blank except for a small notation of the sign and number on one side (i.e. Aries 1, Aries
2 up to Pisces 30). Marc would shuffle the cards and place one in front of Elsie, neither
of them knowing the sign or number on the card. Marc wrote about this: “One card
was put face down before the medium, and she reported on the picture she saw by
inward vision. This was noted hurriedly in pencil on the card itself.” During the whole
process, Marc kept shuffling the cards. Hence, the Sabian Oracle clairvoyantly came
through Elsie’s psychically attuned mind completely at random (i.e. not in zodiac order
Aries 1, Aries 2, Aries 3 etc.) They did ninety Symbols, took a break, did another ninety,
had lunch and a short drive, then did another ninety and finished the last ninety at the
end of the day.
That the entire set of Sabian Symbols was visualized and recorded in one day is a truly
extraordinary feat! If the process of visualizing and recording the Symbols took four
hours in the morning and four hours in the afternoon, on average 45 Symbols would
have to have been visualized per hour, or one every minute and a half. Elsie Wheeler
was obviously tapping into another level of consciousness.
What they’d achieved on that day became clearer and clearer to Marc Edmund Jones
over the following years. He had called the exercise an ‘experiment’, but exactly what
they had discovered is still emerging today through the minds of those who use the
Symbols
The magic behind the 'Experiment'
Marc Edmund Jones believed that Elsie Wheeler had tapped into what he called the
‘ancient mind matrix’ of the Sabian alchemists of ancient Mesopotamia. Jones wrote
that “…psychism seams to deal with (a) sort of group identity, or with an intelligence
which is immortal in the fact that it can be revivified and consulted at will.”
Marc said that there was a presence and cooperation “on the invisible side of life”
of one of the Brothers of the ancient Sabian occult sect. At the end of the day, when
the entire Oracle had been completed, Marc sensed something was wrong with one
of the Symbols, and asked Elsie to do that particular one again. He felt this so strongly
that it occurred to him that he was being guided by something, so he asked Elsie if
‘the Brother’ was there. Upon hearing that he was, Marc asked her what he was doing,
to which she responded that he was “standing with his arms folded.” Marc then said
“Ask him why he didn’t correct that.” Elsie responded, “He says that is up to you.” It
appears that on all levels, a higher kind of ‘consciousness’ or ‘intelligence’ was operating.
Why the name‘Sabian’?
The Sabian Symbol story is embedded in the ancient cultures of the Middle East. Marc
Edmund Jones felt that there was an “unseen agency”—an external, esoteric mind—set at
work in the birthing of the Sabian Symbols. Connection was made through a ‘Brother’, a

<<<PAGE 9>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
iv
member of the ancient Mesopotamian brotherhood, the Sabian Brotherhood. He believed
that they were the ‘voices’ that were spiritually behind Elsie Wheeler, delivering the
messages that became the Symbols.
The Sabian people were an ancient race of alchemists, living in Harran, a city on
the banks of the Euphrates River in Mesopotamia, where astrology is said to have
originated. Harran existed from the third millennium BC to the thirteenth century AD.
It was the repository for the philosophy of the ancient Chaldeans, who were among
the founders of astrology. The Sabians were alchemists who were into talismanic magic
and hermeticism. Michael Baigent in his book ‘From the Omens of Babylon’ describes
talismanic magic as “the magic whereby a deity’s power is attracted or coerced down
to be concentrated into a physical object.. It is, perhaps, analogous to a huge spiritual
lens which might magnify and concentrate the powers from above.”
In early Babylonia the moon—cult was the national religion: the name Chaldeans
means ‘moon—worshippers’. As the religion was gradually wiped out elsewhere, the
Sabian people maintained and developed the tradition of Chaldean astrology. They
built temples to planets and their rather sophisticated system of alchemy linked the
7 planets (as were known then) with metals, colors and numbers. They worked with
talismans, oracles and magic. The last temple that was left standing was a moon temple,
destroyed by the Tartars in AD 1032. The sect itself disappeared during Mongol invasions
of the thirteenth century, when its water supply was diverted to a neighboring town.
The Visionaries behind the Oracle
Elsie Wheeler the clairvoyant
Elsie May Wheeler was born on September 3, 1887 at 9.39 pm in Norris City,
Illinois. Severely afflicted and crippled with arthritis, she spent her entire life in a
wheelchair. Jones said of her “She couldn’t turn her head and could barely hold her
hands” Her intuitive and visionary abilities were not impaired by her handicap. She
was an extraordinary clairvoyant and said to be blessed with the ability to see images
quickly and clearly.
In the 1920 Census, Elsie is listed as being at the Bethesda Hospital and Home for
the Incurables in St. Louis, Missouri. She moved to San Diego some time in the early
1920’s, living with her uncle Frank W. Baxter on India Street, Washington and Market
Street at various times. In the 1930 Census, Frank was listed as being a barber and Elsie
as a spiritualist medium. She spent many of her days at the San Diego Indoor Sports
club, a place disabled people have been socializing at since the early 1900’s, and is still
in operation today.
Even though her Birthday Symbol is Virgo 12: A Bride With Her Veil Snatched Away,
Elsie never married nor had children. It seems that she was “wedded” to a higher
spiritual purpose. Her ‘Veil’ seems to be firmly in place as not much has been recorded
or written about her, but the legacy she leaves behind lives on through the gift that is

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Preface
v
the Sabian Oracle. The beauty and grace with which she is said to have lived her life is
enhanced by the gift she gave to the world. She died at the age of 51 in San Diego on
the 26th November 1938.
Marc Edmund Jones the astrologer
Marc Edmund Jones was born on October 1, 1888, at 8:37 AM CST, in St. Louis,
Missouri. He lived a colorful and varied life, being a Presbyterian minister, American
Theosophist, occult philosopher and prolific scriptwriter for the film industry. Jones
was an astrologer for over sixty years and is widely accredited with having made major
contributions to the field of astrology. Not only did he create the Sabian Symbols, he
devised a whole different approach to the understanding and teaching of astrology,
assigning to it a more spiritual basis. He died on March 5, 1980, in Stanwood, WA at
the age of 91.
What is the zodiac?
The zodiac is an imaginary band of sky that follows the sun’s annual path as seen from
earth. If we could observe the motion of the sun against the stars for an entire year, it
would appear to trace out a large belt or circle in the sky that we call the “ecliptic”. This
circle also happens to be the plane of the earth’s orbit around the Sun. The zodiac is a thin
band of the sky on either side of the ecliptic. The word “zodiac” literally means “circle
of life”, or “circle of living beings” as most of the zodiac signs are animals or people.
The band is divided into twelve equal parts, each containing a different astrological
constellation. These are the Sun signs or Star signs of the zodiac.
The zodiac acts as the earth’s aura. Just as a human being possesses an aura which
surrounds and penetrates the physical body, so also is the Earth planet clothed with the
subtle matter of the zodiac. The physical plane is familiar ground to everyone, but not
so the spheres that lie beyond it. These include the etheric, the astral, the mental, the
spiritual, and the higher spiritual. All of these dimensions affect us in many ways.
The earliest recorded mention of the zodiac we know of comes from the lands of
ancient Mesopotamia, which is roughly the area of modern Iraq. The Mesopotamians,
most particularly the people of Babylon, recorded astronomical events on clay tablets.
These tablets show the first record of the use of the zodiac in the 5th century BC. Other
evidence for a Mesopotamian origin for the zodiac exists in the types of animals chosen
for the constellations (e.g. lions and scorpions).
What are Zodiac Signs?
The expressions “star sign”, “sun sign” or “zodiac sign” all actually mean the same
thing. When someone says “I’m an Aries”, what they’re really saying is they were born
at the time of the year when the sun was in the zodiac sign of Aries. In other words,
their sun sign is Aries. Because our calendar is designed to coincide with the motions of

<<<PAGE 11>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
vi
the Sun around the zodiac, the Sun is in Aries at nearly the same time period each year
(roughly March 21st to April 20th). Hence the 12 zodiac or sun signs are like months
of a calendar based on the zodiac.
The zodiac is divided into 12 signs, each 30 degrees long. The zodiac signs start
with Aries, which begins at the spot on the ecliptic where the Sun is on the first day of
spring in the northern hemisphere i.e. March 21. These 30 degree sections of the sky
mark out the signs from Aries through to the last sign, Pisces. The 12 signs of the zodiac
are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn,
Aquarius, and Pisces.
Some notes on symbolism
Symbolism is a catalyst or key to accessing our inner wisdom, our connection with
the universal consciousness, our spirit or soul—what some call the higher self. This
aspect of ourselves does not think in words, but in images, feelings, colors and sounds
from a symbolic perspective. It is the abstract part of our psyche that our logical and
rational society often does not accept as valid because it doesn’t make literal sense: it
requires interpretation into objective language, which is not always wholly adequate
or accurate.
One of the major current effects that is occurring is a real need to reconnect with ‘the
feminine’ —the right brain, intuitive functions. More than ever, we are realizing that the
left brain, the logical and reasoning mind, doesn’t provide wholly adequate answers to
the questions we are asking. We are finding more creative solutions that add meaning
to our lives and moments of illumination than we previously thought possible. We are
often surprised by images and situations that affect us far more deeply than is logically
explicable. It is symbolism that creates a pathway to our deeper understandings and
brings our deeper understandings into the conscious world. As Tom Chetwynd says
in his book Dictionary of Symbols “Symbols have always been treasured as a means of
releasing sources of energy from the unconscious.”
When we ask the Sabian Symbols a question, we must keep in mind the need to widen
our vision. Looking at the answer through a narrow range of focus may lead to missing
the many rewarding possibilities inherent in the answer we’re given. For instance, a
client asked about the romantic possibilities that were available to him as he was in
the process of breaking up a long term relationship. The answer he got was Leo 15: A
Street Pageant Moving Along a Street Packed With People. After a minute looking at
the Symbol, he realized the answer he was receiving was to get out into life, out where
there are lots of people in order to increase his possibilities of meeting someone. The
literal translation of the Symbol did not necessarily include that exact message for him;
it was more about adapting the Symbol to his particular question. However, it is indeed
possible that he may meet someone whilst at a street market, or bumping into someone
on the street, as these things are inherent in that Symbol.
Looking with an increased depth of view always helps when you’re dealing with
oracles.

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Preface
vii
Notes for astrologers
How does one use the Sabian Symbols in astrology?
When looking up the Symbol for a planet or placement in a chart, one must round up
the degree to the next whole number i.e., if the planet is at 27.15 Pisces, you should read
Pisces 28. This is because the zodiac starts at 00.00 Aries and the Symbols begin at
Aries 1. So, even if the degree you’re looking at is 27.00 Pisces, you would still read
Pisces 28. Having said that, it should be emphasized that the Symbol for the degree
before (i.e. Pisces 27) will shine a lot of light on the issue being investigated—the
degree before indicates the ‘karmic’ issues of the planet or placement, a talent that’s
been brought through or an issue that needs to be worked out and possibly let go of.
Think of the interpretations applied to the moon’s south node as a guide to the degree
before. The degree after (Pisces 29) is also very illuminating.
These Symbols can be used in every aspect of astrology, including horary, mundane,
electional and indeed for any of the zodiacal systems such as heliocentric, sidereal or
draconic. A great exercise that helps one to see more into these Symbols is to look up
the symbol for the Sun at sunrise and watch what happens throughout the day. You can
also tune into the degree of the new or full moon for clues to what’s going on during
that period.
. The Symbols can be applied to any point in the zodiac. They will reveal, at times
brilliantly and clearly, added layers of meaning to the degree of any of the planets, any
asteroids that one might use, the angles—in fact anywhere there’s a zodiacal degree.
My belief is that wherever one seeks meaning, one will find meaning.
As we move out of the Piscean age and into the Aquarian age, we are transmuting in
many ways, with the vibration of our spiritual and intellectual minds moving into higher
gears as we evolve. In such hectic times, we hunger for meaning and guidance, but
often don’t have the time or the patience to pause and reflect deeply on our situation.
The Sabian Oracle opens the doorway between our inner feelings and intentions and
our conscious mind. They do this by helping to put what is within us into words.
Being provided with possibilities enables us to act positively and confidently, and think
rationally.
Welcome to the wonderful mystical, magical Sabian Oracle.
Recommended reading:
The Sabian Symbols in Astrology by Marc Edmond Jones, Sabian Publishing Society, 1976.
An Astrological Mandala by Dane Rudhyar, Vintage Books (Random House), 1973.
From the Omens of Babylon: Astrology and Ancient Mesopotamia by Michael Baigent,
Arkana (Penguin) 1994.
The Sabian Assembly website: http://www.sabian.org
Lynda Hill’s website: http://www.sabiansymbols.com

<<<PAGE 13>>>
viii
MY JOURNEY WITH THE SABIAN SYMBOLS
Finding and studying the Sabian Symbols has changed my life far more than I could
have imagined. My life has been enormously enriched. The interest that people have
in the Sabian Symbols has led me to travel the world for the last 10 years, teaching and
giving readings and my articles are published in magazines and journals all over the
world. It feels like an honor to do this work.
These days, studying and spreading the message of the Sabian Symbols is an integral
part of my life. In my youth I didn’t understand why I was irresistibly drawn to certain
places. From 1976 and over the course of twenty years I traveled to more than 80
countries. I was most touched with the depth and wisdom of civilizations of the past,
particularly the middle east. I now realize I have been guided and driven to take this
journey—even from my early years.
I originally came across the Sabian Symbols in the late 1980’s. I found them
fascinating and very telling about a person’s life and indeed their destiny. I used them
here and there in my work and found them to be extraordinary in painting the stories
that we live out. However, on my birthday in 1992, a clairvoyant friend of mine, Georgina,
said that I had a mission to spread the word of something “special” in astrology. She told
me that I would be invited to speak at conferences in Australia and around the world,
particularly the United States. My instant response was, “Sure, Georgina, except when I
stand up in front of a crowd to speak, I turn to jelly. I even cried once.” I didn’t feel filled
with confidence on any level to do what she was saying I’d do. She continued, saying
that I’d write books, one of which would be a big success. I would become known for
teaching something special and I would gain the respect of my peers. I remember her
words when I protested that I had nothing special to lecture or write about: “Well, I’m
just telling you what I’m seeing.”
Despite my reluctance, at first, to admit it, the things that Georgina said to me
resonated with what I wanted. Two weeks later, in my office, I decided to “ask” for what
she’d said. I stated what I wanted, holding the thought for a moment or two. I asked for
something “special” to contribute to astrology, for the ability to be able to lecture and
write, for the respect of my peers and to be able to travel with my work. Soon after,
I picked up a copy of Dane Rudhyar’s ‘An Astrological Mandala’, a book published in
1973 on the Sabian Symbols, and within weeks of asking for these things, I was tearing
around the house like a woman possessed, researching and writing about them.
Within the next month I lectured for the first time in my life: I gave two lectures
in Sydney and 5 months later delivered my first talk to an American audience at the
Aquarian Revelation Conference in Lansing, Michigan. I also spoke on a panel at that
conference in front of some three hundred people at the invitation of one of astrology’s
brightest stars, Alan Oken. In the thirteen years since then, I have given lectures,
workshops and readings in the United States, England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Holland,
South Africa, New Zealand and Australia. At the time of writing this, I’ve completed
19 lecture tours of the United States and three world tours. Every step of the way I’ve
felt guided and supported.

<<<PAGE 14>>>
My Journey With The Sabian Symbols
ix
It really all began at the age of 22. I felt compelled to travel to the Middle East, to
walk on the soil and breathe the air. I felt particularly drawn to Iraq, Turkey and Jordan.
On this particular trip, in 1976, I was interested in astrology, but didn’t have any in-depth
understanding of it; I certainly had no awareness of the Sabian Symbols.
I arrived in Tehran by myself to meet up with a bus tour that would take me
through the Middle East, taking in Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Israel, Turkey and
then through Europe to London. It was an “overland expedition” that drew the young,
alternative-minded travelers of the day. We were told that we were the second bus to
be given permission to travel through Iraq after the borders opened up. I joined 36
Australian, British, New Zealand and U.S. nationals and careened off through the lands
of Iran and Iraq. Here I was, 22 years old, in the cradle of civilization: Baghdad, Babylon,
Ur, Ctesiphon, Petra, Aqaba, Jerusalem, etc, relishing the atmosphere and wondering, at
times, what I was doing there. The trip left an indelible impression on me. I remember
saying that I had photographs of the people of Iraq in my photo album, and pictures of
them in my heart. When I’d say this, I’d wonder why I felt it so strongly.
During my visit to Petra, the ancient rose-red city in southern Jordan, I was sitting
in the amphitheatre and suddenly had an overwhelming sense of emotion engulf me.
In completely alien surroundings, I felt I’d been brought home. I was even moved to say
“thank you” to some higher being. I had never felt truly at home anywhere, and haven’t
felt the same in any of the 80 or so countries I’ve traveled to since.
In 1995, Robert Zoller, a New York medieval astrology scholar who translates ancient
Latin astrological texts into English, was my tour guide around New York. I spoke of
my fascination with the Middle East and particularly Petra. We were walking along the
street when he pointed out that the Sabian alchemists’ ancestors from Mesopotamia,
an area which encompassed modern day Iraq, were the Nabateans, the people who
built Petra. This aroused feelings in me that defy words or logic. How extraordinary
that some 20 years before, Petra had felt so amazingly familiar.
These kinds of synchronicities really do defy words. It’s an amazing journey, this
journey we’re on! Life is more amazing than we know and the Sabian Symbols help us
realize its magic and mystery.
Lynda Hill
January 2004
Avalon, Sydney

<<<PAGE 15>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
x
USING THE ORACLE CARDS
First—concentrate on your question or situation
The Sabian Oracle seems to work most effectively when your question is important
to you and your concentration is undisturbed. This is true of most oracles. However,
if you want guidance and are not sure which question to ask, you can ask “what do I
need to know most?” or “what’s coming up for me?” There are no rules, but the more
focused you are, the more you will understand what the Oracle is telling you.
Pick a red card and a blue card
The simplest method is to pick two cards, one red and one blue. The red cards are
marked with a sign and the blue ones with a number.
Look up the answer in the book
The end result (e.g. Aquarius 29) is then looked up in the book and the answer
needs to be contemplated.
It really is as simple as that.
However, there are other ways of selecting a Symbol. Each page has been numbered
from 1 to 360 so that you can simply choose a number in your mind or even a number
that may come up in your surroundings. You can also randomly choose a sign and a
number; or perhaps just open the book and see where your eyes fall. However, the
thing to remember when using these other methods is after using them for some time
you may effect the selection by preferring particular numbers or signs or the book
may open to the most often used pages. The best method by far is the card method. It
ensures a true selection that the others may not.
The rule I use for accessing the wisdom of The Sabian Symbols is that there are
no mistakes, even if you read the ‘wrong’ interpretation, or find out later you’ve made
some kind of mistake. There are no mistakes. We receive the message we’re meant to
receive when we’re meant to.
If a card falls or jumps (as they sometimes do) out of the deck, attention should be
paid to it. For instance, if you’ve just selected a red card and its Aries and the number
18 falls out as you’re shuffling, you should continue, select another blue card, but refer
to Aries 18 as part of your answer.
Sometimes, the first answer outlines the actual situation, and gives advice about
it. You may indeed need further guidance and consulting the Sabian Oracle again will
provide deeper insight. There are no rules for how many times you should consult the
Oracle about a particular question, but it must be remembered that time should be

<<<PAGE 16>>>
xi
taken in considering what it is telling you. The first answer is most likely to contain the
purest expression of the situation and any subsequent queries on the same matter will
show added layers and descriptions. Unfortunately, continuing to pull the cards until
you get the ‘right answer’ is not a good way to go about it, as you can become confused
and lose the wisdom that should really be helping you.
You can also make up your own spreads. For instance, you could pull three
cards about an issue: one for the past, one for the present and one for the future. The
possibilities are only limited by the imagination.
A magical tool we can all use
Remarkable things happen when we use the Sabian Symbols. Events can become
unreal and multi-layered. Watching the Symbol come alive around you expands your
sense of everything being interrelated and events of synchronicity happen more and
more often. Things often occur that defy explanation.
One such time was during a workshop in New Zealand. During the first part of my
lecture, a woman at the back of the class asked if she could use numerology to come
up with a Sabian Symbol. I replied that it didn’t matter what system was used to come
up with a Symbol, there would be meaning in it. With expressions of amazement she
told the class that she’d added up the numbers for the letters in her name and it came
to 35. She’d looked up the Sabian Symbol on page 35—Taurus 5: ‘A Youthful Widow,
Fresh and Soul Cleansed From Grief, Kneels at an Open Grave to Discover the Secret
of Eternal Life’. Her husband had built a coffin for her! The woman said that the coffin
was stored in their garage and every time she drove in and out of the garage, she was
confronted by it. She said it was to save money and added that he’d built one for himself,
their two coffins stood on end, side-by-side in her garage.
The Sabian Symbols can have a sense of humor at times. I was speaking at an
astrology conference in Moscow in 1996. A party was held for the speakers, both
foreign and Russian, on Saturday night in the hostel room of a couple of the Russian
academics. It was by no means luxurious; it was a cheap student hostel. One by one,
the furniture in the room collapsed. First the table where I had put 2 bottles of wine;
then we were warned not to sit on a particular chair and a different one collapsed and
the bed collapsed into pieces as we tried to move it to make way for more people.
Amongst gales of laughter, somebody drew two cards to get a message for the
moment. They drew Virgo 27: ‘Aristocratic Elderly Ladies Drinking Afternoon Tea in a
Wealthy Home’—the Sabian Symbols revealing a great sense of humor, as this was the
exact opposite of what was happening. The guy whose bed fell apart fell against the
wall and slid down it, laughing. The Symbol was showing the sheer wealth of spirit
and enjoyment.
Of course, many times the answer will reflect serious and important issues in your
life. One client of mine selected the Symbol Virgo 22: ‘A Royal Coat of Arms Enriched
With Precious Stones’. Up until she pulled that Symbol she wasn’t feeling very happy or
regal at all. However, what she read surprised and encouraged her as she was directly

<<<PAGE 17>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xii
descended from New Guinea royalty and the Symbol was reminding her of it. It told
her to believe in herself and always hold her head up high.
Several years ago, our 14 year old tabby cat, Bubbles, died. We were all very upset,
especially my two children. The same day she died, my daughter Jess, who was about 12
at the time, asked me if we could ask the Sabian Oracle for a message about Bubbles. She
picked two cards and the answer she received was at once enlightening and reassuring;
Aquarius 14: A Train Entering a Tunnel. We somehow knew that Bubbles was heading
for the ‘light’ and we sat and cried together tears of joy, feeling that she was moving
somewhere towards the light. The following day, Jess asked if we could ask the Oracle
again. I hesitated, wondering what on earth it could tell us, but knowing that the Oracle
is always illuminating in some measure, I decided to take another look. The Symbol
Jess got was Leo 27 Daybreak – The Luminescence of Dawn in the Eastern Sky. That
felt extraordinary! Reading the words I’d written about that Symbol was very healing
for Jess: “You may feel that there is finally a chance for a new beginning. Things have
been sacrificed and there may be a certain emptiness, but now you can see the light and
move forward again. New ideas, new opportunities, new perspectives, new realizations
are emerging.” It seemed to us that Bubbles had reached the other side, indeed it felt
that she was reincarnating!
Some things to remember
The ‘you’ referred to in the wording of the text may refer to you, a friend, the
situation you’re in, etc. Read the text and look to see how it fits the particular situation
you’re enquiring about.
Sometimes the image of the Symbol opens up a dialogue between your intuitive
awareness and conscious awareness, sometimes it is the text, sometimes just snippets
of it, but the purpose of the Symbols is not only to instruct you, but also inspire you
to recognize and realize your own understanding of the answer – the answer that is
right for you.
There are a number of generally accepted meanings and archetypes to certain
images. It is, however, important to remember that each individual must allow for
their own personal response to a Symbol. The Symbols will have different meanings
to different people at different times in different situations, although the nature of the
Symbol will define the parameters of possibility
The more you expand your vision, the more you’ll find layers and layers of meaning.
There is always more to a Sabian Symbol than first meets the eye. If you take notice, you
will see actual representations of the Symbol in the world around you. For instance,
you may pull Aquarius 29: ‘A Butterfly Emerging From a Chrysalis’ and see butterflies
around you: Perhaps you’ll be walking out doors and a butterfly floats past you, you go
to lunch and your girlfriend turns up wearing a butterfly clip, you see a butterfly in an
advertisement on the television. Clues can pop up everywhere, particularly if you leave
your mind open and receptive to the impressions. Further, the more you open up to
seeing the Symbol around you, the more you will expand your psychic awareness. Your
intuition will reward you more and more with deeper insights and understanding.

<<<PAGE 18>>>
Using The Oracle Cards
xiii
What separates the Sabian Symbols from most other symbolic oracles is that the
language is modern and reflects the images of today. A wonderful oracle like the I Ching
is made difficult by the references to things that were relevant to the ancient Chinese
culture. Things like princes, tigers and ox-carts. The Sabian Symbols talk about cars,
trains and airplanes. In the symbolic context these images have clear and current
meaning. The Car is symbolic of the individual; a Train speaks of the collective; Window
Shopping of desirable things that are out of reach; the Glass Bottomed Boat shows
observing things and viewing the emotions; Santa Claus bringing gifts; and so on.
The Caution section at the bottom of each page is included to open your mind to
the more difficult or confronting possibilities that you may need to be watchful for
in your situation. Your intuition will soon tell you if the situation surrounding your
question is more positive or negative.
The greatest barrier to understanding what the Symbol is telling you is not allowing
your mind to switch to an intuitive way of thinking. It’s best not to let the rational mind
and your hopes and desires color your interpretation. Spend time and wait until you
become aware of the answer that feels right—even if the answer is difficult. We tend
to grow spiritually or emotionally through difficult experiences. The Sabian Oracle is
here to give you a guiding hand. The answers truly lie inside you; the Oracle serves to
make you consciously aware of them.
I advise people using the Sabian Symbols to use them as a tool for inspiration and
guidance. Look at the words and allow your mind to become consciously aware of your
situation. It is by taking control and ownership of your own experience that makes a
tool like the Sabian Oracle so valuable.
To learn more about how to use the Sabian Symbols, and how to apply them in
astrology, please visit http://www.sabiansymbols.com

<<<PAGE 19>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xiv
All you need is two packs of ordinary playing cards with different colour
(or style of) backing. Most commonly available is red and blue. You can
use only one pack, but you will need to make some marking on the back
or add a sticker to distinguish between the court cards and number cards.
Creating the 42 cards:
1. Separate the court cards from the number cards. (The Ace is a number card)
2. Remove and discard the Spade number cards. (Ace - 10)
3. Put the red backed court cards with the blue backed number cards.
(You will then have a spare set of blue court cards and red number cards)
4. Now you are ready to name the court cards and number the number cards.
Naming and numbering the cards:
The court cards represent the 12 Sun signs and the number cards represent the
30 degrees. You now need to mark the cards. You can use an indelible pen or
some other form of permanent marker. You can also use stickers that you can
write on..
The correspondences:
Aries ______ K
Taurus ____ Q
Gemini ____ J
Cancer ____ K
Leo _______ Q
Virgo _____ J
Libra ______ K
Scorpio ____ Q
Sagittarius _ J
Capricorn _ K
Aquarius __ Q
Pisces _____ J
1-10 ___A - 10
11-20 __ A - 10
21-30 __A - 10
Your cards are now ready!
HOW TO PREPARE
ORACLE CARDS
In case you misplace your cards, here is a method to create a replacement 
deck.

<<<PAGE 20>>>
Using the Birthday Index
You can learn a lot about yourself by looking up the Sabian Symbol for your birthday
(go to Appendix A for the Birthday Table). For each day of the year, there are three Sabian
Symbols listed. Each of these will all have an effect on your life in some way. Sometimes
the message of a Symbol listed for a birthday will immediately stand out, other times
the meaning may not be quite so obvious. The Sabian Symbols are played out through
the way we express our personalities and by the events in our lives. Alternatively, you
may see the Symbol demonstrated through the agency of someone else in your life;
friends, parents, partners etc. However, even in the case of seeing the Symbol expressed
through somebody else, it is often that person mirroring something that you perhaps
haven’t noticed or learnt about yourself.
It is also extremely useful to look up the Symbols for the date of an event, something
that’s happened, or indeed, something you’re planning to do. If you are planning a
wedding or a party, for instance, see what the Symbols are saying for that date.
Celebrity Birthday Symbol Examples
Princess Diana - July 1
Cancer 9 – a Small Naked Girl Bends over a Sparkling Pond Trying to Catch a Fish
Diana was often photographed in her bathing costume, swimming in the ocean
or relaxing by a pool. This Symbol also speaks of naiveté and innocence, qualities she
was both known and admired for.
Cancer 10 – A Large Diamond in the First Stages of the Cutting Process
When the first pictures of Diana appeared in the media, she was like a beautiful
uncut diamond. As the years went by, we saw a beautiful woman emerge, well known
for her penchant for fashion and beauty.
Cancer 11 – A Clown is Caricaturing Well Known Personalities
The ‘Clown’ is reflected in her need to put on a face for many occasions. It seems
she was seldom really allowed to just ‘be herself’.
Michael Jackson - August 29
Virgo 6 - A Merry Go Round
The ‘Merry Go Round’ reflects his life as more circus than reality. Indeed, he has
merry go rounds at his own theme park/home, Neverland.
Virgo 7 – A Harem
Among other things, the Harem Symbol speaks of his large family and his sizable

<<<PAGE 21>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xvi
entourage of people.
Virgo 8 - A Girl Takes Her First Dancing Lesson
Jackson can easily take credit for changing the face of modern dance.
Christopher Reeve - September 25
Libra 2 - The Light of the Sixth Race Transmuted to the Seventh
This Symbol speaks of his days as Superman, plus the “superhuman” qualities he
expresses in his everyday life. In the movie ‘Superman’, he is portrayed as coming from
a planet that is more highly evolved than Earth.
Libra 3 - The Dawn of a New Day Reveals Everything Changed
One moment he was a vital, athletic and able man, the next minute he was in a
totally new reality, facing life in a wheelchair. Reeves has also said that after the accident,
every single time he woke up, he’d have to face the reality he was really in after having
dreams that pictured him with full mobility.
Libra 4 - A Group of Young People Sit in Spiritual Communion around a Campfire
Reeve has an uncanny ability to bring people together in a common cause—his
work for the support of spinal research has developed worldwide awareness.
Hillary Clinton - October 26
Scorpio 2 -A Broken Bottle and Spilled Perfume
Hillary had an amazing capacity to restrain her emotions during the scandals
surrounding her husband. Even though the ‘contents’ of her marriage and private life
were ‘Spilled’ (so to speak!), she retained a high degree of dignity.
Scorpio 3 – Neighbors Help in a House-Raising Party in a Small Village
Hillary is known for her community work. Indeed, she wrote a book titled “It
Takes a Village”.
Scorpio 4 – A Youth Holding a Lighted Candle in a Devotional Ritual
This Symbol speaks about Hillary’s devotion, her causes and her career. Her
speeches are often focused on talking about our hopes and fears, and about our
children’s futures.
Deepak Chopra - 22 October
Libra 28 -A Man Alone in Deep Gloom. Unnoticed, Angels are Coming to His Aid
People all over the world claim that his philosophies have helped them through
difficult periods of their life.

<<<PAGE 22>>>
Using The Birthday Index
Libra 29 – Mankind’s Vast and Enduring Effort to Reach for Knowledge Transferable
from Generation to Generation
Chopra’s books seem to have assumed a timeless quality, and an appeal to people
of all ages.
Libra 30 - Three Mounds of Knowledge on a Philosopher’s Head
This is indicative of his finely tuned teachings and ideas.
Marilyn Monroe - June 1
Gemini 10 - An Airplane Dives Toward the Earth as Though Falling
Through taking risks her life often got out of hand. This symbol also reflects the
depressions she frequently experienced.
Gemini 11 – Newly Opened Lands Offer the Pioneer New Opportunities for Experience
This Symbol paints the picture of how Norma Jean went off to Hollywood, starting
a brand new life.
Gemini 12 – A Black Slave Girl Demands Her Rights of Her Mistress
Marilyn was under estimated by both her peers in the movie industry and her
audience. People saw her as just a pretty face and didn’t take her seriously.
Recently, I met a Pisces woman who was lamenting being married to an Aries man.
She said she was tired of battling with him. I asked her what her birth date was and
she replied March 3. I told her that one of her Sabian Symbols was Pisces 13 - A Sword,
Used in Many Battles, In a Museum. I explained to her that ‘battling’ was not something
she wanted to be doing anymore. This Symbol gives the advice “There may have been
a lot learnt in the ‘Battles’ you’ve experienced, but one thing that’s best learnt is that
continuing to fight may lead to a bitter end, with no one being a true winner’. The
Symbol for Pisces 14 – A Lady Wrapped in Fox Fur contained clues to how she needs
to use her feminine intelligence in order to get the most out of her relationship with
her husband.
I asked what her husband’s birthday was. Her reply was the 11th April. One of the
Symbols for his birthday is Aries 21 - A Boxer is Entering the Ring. She explained how
he would take any opportunity to pick on her or to start a fight. This insight lead to
some extraordinary insights into their situation and no doubt helped her to understand
what was happening between the two of them. In order for him to gain the benefits
of the other Sabian Symbol for his birthday – Aries 22 – The Gate to the Garden of All
Fulfilled Desires, he had to drop his “warring” attitude and accept his life for all the
beauty and promise it contained without fighting or being defensive.
But enough about everybody else—it’s time for you to look up your own Birthday
Symbols!

<<<PAGE 23>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
xviii

<<<PAGE 24>>>
ARIES
E
1
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN HAS RISEN OUT OF THE
OCEAN,A SEAL IS EMBRACING HER
Commentary: ‘A Woman Has Risen Out of the Ocean’. She is
consciously aware of leaving the past behind in order to emerge
into a whole new arena of existence and activity. The ‘Seal
Embracing Her’ symbolizes her being welcomed into this new
arena. This degree is right on the cusp of Pisces and Aries, when
the yearly astrological cycle begins again. It’s like the beginning
of a new year. In the Northern hemisphere it marks the beginning
of spring—the Spring Equinox. Long ago there was a belief that
the spirits of those who had drowned at sea had the ability to
enjoy life in the ocean in the form of ‘Seals’. When they wished,
the Selkies could, once per moon cycle, swim ashore, drop their
sealskins and become mortals again.
Oracle: New understandings and awareness are coming to light.
Whatever is emerging, either in you or around you needs to be
accepted, welcomed and nurtured. It’s best to resist the old
familiar ways of being or relating as they can pull you back to
outgrown and possibly unsatisfactory conditions. Maybe you feel
you are not being acknowledged, don’t have a voice or are not
being heard. Take heart as comfort and salvation are likely to be
found in the most unexpected places. Despite any setbacks, be
aware that you possess the power to make the necessary changes
in your life. It is time to claim your place or make a mark in this
new world. So much potential lies ahead of you. Welcome this
new beginning and be fearless in the face of the changes that
are coming. Accept the ‘Embrace’ of those who welcome you
into this new sphere. It is inevitable that you’ll leave something
behind as you move into this new territory. Enjoy the journey
and give birth to self-love, self-worth and divine creativity. Let
go of the past and emerge into life and love.
Keywords: Cycles starting. Beginnings. Emergence into concrete
manifestation. Embracing and honoring the shadow. Recognizing
our animal side. Tropical islands or lands. Rocky shores. Seals.
Oceans and water. Shedding skins. Transmutation. The Selkie
myth. Grounding one’s energy. Stepping between the sea and
the shore. Androgyny. Love and its embrace. Finding your feet
and your voice. Mermaids.
The Caution: Using masculine power to overshadow emotions.
Refusing to move on. Feeling held back by fears and old life
patterns. Falling back into previous, unsatisfactory conditions.
Dragging others backwards. Immobilizing fear of the unknown.
Being just another “fish in the sea”.
Change starts when someone
sees the next step.
William Drayton
But the beginning of things,of
a world especially,is necessarily
vague,tangled,chaotic,and
exceedingly disturbing.How
few of us ever emerge from
such a beginning! How many
souls perish in its tumult!
Kate Chopin
Who would be A merman bold,
Sitting alone Singing alone
Under the sea,With a crown of
gold,On a throne?
Lord AlfredTennyson
The journey of a thousand
leagues begins from beneath
your feet.
LaoTzu
And forget not that the earth
delights to feel your bare feet
and the winds long to play with
your hair.
Kahlil Gibran
Everything teaches transition,
transference,metamorphosis:
therein is human power,in
transference,not in creation;
and therein is human destiny,
not in longevity but in removal
we dive and reappear in new
places.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Aries 1

<<<PAGE 25>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
2
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A COMEDIAN ENTERTAINING A GROUP
OF FRIENDS
Commentary: ‘A Comedian Entertaining a Group of Friends’ is
seen. The function of the ‘Comedian’ is to show that there’s a need
to have a lighter and more positive attitude to ourselves, others
and life in general. He’s ‘Entertaining a Group of Friends’ which
promotes a feeling of coming together or sharing through laughter
and fun. The talk may center on people, things or situations with
the more amusing aspects brought out. An objective awareness
of life can bring enjoyment to concerns as we see things in a
different or wider perspective.
Oracle: We often need to be reminded that we are essentially
human and share the same imperfections, frailties and
shortcomings as the next person. Look for the fun in what’s going
on around you as light relief can often be found through seeing
the humor and the funny side. In answer to your question this
Symbol often shows that there’s a need to let go of seriousness.
Try looking at things with a smile on your face. Simple changes
in attitude or approach can often free your mind and bring about
a much better outcome. However, this can show somebody not
taking life seriously enough or perhaps putting on a show to get
attention or to be liked. Look at what’s happening and evaluate
it: Is there any truth in what’s being said or is it really just a joke?
Although there is often pleasure in sharing fun, sometimes it is
just masking the more serious aspects of the situation. The old
saying “many a truth is told in jest” is often right. Things are
often revealed by a slip of the tongue. Whatever, remember; it’s
good to be lighthearted–and other people’s spirits will probably
be raised at the same time.
Keywords: Seeing the funny side. Having insights. Always being
on the ‘go’ mentally. Putting on a show for others. Having presence
and charisma. Being the life of the party. Banter. Cracking up
with laughter. Ragging each other. Humorous interplay. Saying
what the group wants to hear. Jokes. The buffoon. Inside jokes.
The jester.
The Caution: Being silly or trivial to avoid reality and gain
acceptance. Feeling separate because of different views. Not
seeing the light side. Being a bore with many irrelevant things
said. Being flippant and insincere. Not being amused. Demanding
the spotlight. Feeling responsible for how others feel. Not
knowing when to stop. Not having good boundaries.
In the end,everything is a gag.
Charlie Chaplin
Sometimes when reading
Goethe I have the paralyzing
suspicion that he is trying to be
funny.
Guy Davenport
The best way to cheer yourself
up is to try to cheer somebody
else up.
MarkTwain
To make mistakes is human;to
stumble is commonplace;to
be able to laugh at yourself is
maturity.
Proverb
The ultimate test of whether
you possess a sense of humor
is your reaction when someone
tells you you don’t.
FrankTyger
Not one shred of evidence
supports the notion that life is
serious.
Anon
A serious and good
philosophical work could be
written consisting entirely of
jokes.
LudwigWittgenstein
Different taste in jokes is a great
strain on the affections.
George Eliot
Aries 2

<<<PAGE 26>>>
ARIES
E
3
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CAMEO SHOWS THE PROFILE OF A
MAN THAT SUGGESTS THE OUTLINE OF
HIS COUNTRY
Commentary: ‘A Cameo Profile’ is a simple yet strong definition
of an individual’s character, shape, loyalties and role in life.
The ‘Cameo’ suggests the appearance of a growing objective
awareness of how someone fits into the larger picture. You may
find that you, or someone else, have a more important role than
was previously thought; or that you are imprinting your mark; or
possibly becoming a model of one’s tradition, culture, thoughts
or ideas.
Oracle: There’s often a need to feel included or involved in the
larger picture in order to feel “whole” or accepted. Taking the
time to examine your place in society can bring about insights
into just what the big picture is for you. Understanding and
expanding your true place in the scheme of things can lead to
actually having a much larger ‘Profile’. This could be on any
level, emotional, physical, mental or spiritual. The ‘Country’ that
this Symbol implies may not have national boundaries. There
is the spiritual “country”, the ideological “country”, even past
life “countries”. There are some people who find their roots in
a mixture of these places, or realities, and don’t actually feel
a belonging to their actual “homeland”. The sense of having a
place is often deep-seated and truly found in the individual’s
belonging to the essential self. How do you, and others, fit into
this situation? Does your ‘Profile’ define you in a different way
from what you’d like, or are you happy with the outline of your
image? Picture who you want to be or what you want out of
life. Using a pen and paper, draw your ‘Cameo’ or just picture
what the outline of your ‘Country’ should be, as it could be an
interesting exercise. We are what we believe we are. What face
are you showing to the world?
Keywords: Observing one’s limitations. Living a life that is large.
Atlases and maps. Standing by one’s self. Allegiances with creed,
religion, race or country. Nationhood. Brotherhood. The land.
People in uniforms of any kind. The face of fighters who fought
‘the good fight’. Borders and limitations to activity. Identification.
Expatriates.
The Caution: Stereotyping one’s self or others. Blindly following
the dogma of parents, government or officials. Not seeing the
true essence of one’s self. Expecting to fit into some “shape” or
model. Becoming identified with externals. Seeking recognition
from others.
As a woman I have no country.
As a woman my country is the
whole world.
VirginiaWoolf
He worked like hell in the
country so he could live in the
city,where he worked like hell
so he could live in the country.
Don Marquis
A man’s country is not a certain
area of land,of mountains,
rivers,and woods,but it is a
principle;and patriotism is
loyalty to that principle.
GeorgeWilliam Curtis
Socrates said he was not an
Athenian or a Greek,but a
citizen of the world.
Plutarch
He who has an art has
everywhere a part.
Romanian Proverb
I have never belonged
wholeheartedly to a country,a
state,or to a circle of friends,nor
even to my own family.
Albert Einstein
All the world is a stage,and all
the men and women merely
players.They have their exits
and entrances;each man in his
time plays many parts.
William Shakespeare
Aries 3

<<<PAGE 27>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
4
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO LOVERS ARE STROLLING THROUGH
A SECLUDED WALK
Commentary: ‘Two Lovers’ are shown ‘Strolling Through a
Secluded Walk’. This image shows that there’s sometimes a need
to escape the realities of the world and touch the deeper feelings
of one’s heart. The ‘Secluded Walk’ that the ‘Lovers’ are taking
pictures the need for private time, solitude or quiet romance. An
actual ‘Secluded Walk’ may not be necessary – what is important
is the ability to exclude outside energies that interfere with the
sharing of intimate time.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that some time should be taken
away from the hustle and bustle of the everyday world, even
if only for a short while. Sometimes a detour must be taken
and the materialistic world put aside in order to share special
moments with someone close to you. You may desire, or even
need to exclude others or outside energies from your life at the
moment. These things may be interfering with what needs to
be said or done in order to solve relationship difficulties and
to move forward in life. If you are by yourself in this situation,
the solution may lie in taking time off and just being alone and
rediscovering yourself. This can open the door to sharing more
intimate dimensions of yourself with another person when you
feel you’re ready for it. This is especially true if your life has been
hectic or confused recently. Sending out an invitation to someone
special to share moments of your life may bring more rewards
than are immediately apparent. Can you schedule things so that
you can afford some time out?
Keywords: Walking love’s path. Secret love affairs. Seeking shelter
from others’ eyes. Wanting or needing to be undisturbed. The
young at heart. Being by one’s self and wondering where the
‘’other’’ is. Romance. Quiet moments. Seclusion and peace.
Intimacy and sharing. Desired destinations. Walking and strolling
together. “Keep Out” signs. Relationships that are solid and
satisfying. Issues of seclusion, inclusion or exculsion. Privacy.
Being self-sufficient.
The Caution: Being ‘selfish’ by keeping one’s partner or friend
to oneself. Jealousy when others are around. Feeling ‘left out’
and uninvited. Narrow-minded responses to people or things.
Loneliness and/or the desire to be left alone. Denial of self and
needs. Not wanting contact. Rejecting those who don’t measure
up. Seeing one’s partner as a possession.
Let there be spaces in your
togetherness.
Kahlil Gibran
Whether joy or sorrowful,the
heart needs a double,because
a joy shared is doubled and a
pain that is shared is divided.
Ruckett
The man who goes alone can
start today;but he who travels
with another must wait till the
other is ready,and it may be a
long time before they get off.
Henry DavidThoreau
I was never less alone than
when by myself.
Edward Gibbon
Far from the madding crowd’s
ignoble strife.
Thomas Gray
Love does not consist in gazing
at each other,but in looking
together in the same direction.
Antoine De Saint-Exupery
I was never less alone than
when by myself.
Edward Gibbon
Far from the madding crowd’s
ignoble strife.
Thomas Gray
Aries 4

<<<PAGE 28>>>
ARIES
E
5
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WHITE TRIANGLE IS SEEN;IT HAS
GOLDEN WINGS
Commentary: ‘A White Triangle’ with ‘Golden Wings’ is a
spiritually uplifting image. It is hard to know exactly what the
clairvoyant Elsie Wheeler saw when she received this image,
but it could be that she saw the vision of a moth—the White
Triangle Tortrix which has gold colored wings. The Symbol it
implies the possibility of being able to raise yourself above the
ordinary, using your natural gifts to find a new perspective into
what’s going on. What’s needed is an uplifted view to expand
your scope of awareness.
Oracle: This is a beautiful Symbol that indicates that you don’t
have to feel stuck in the present situation – you can rise above it
to something more spiritual, beautiful and joyful. It can picture
an eagerness for spiritual integration. At this time there may
be a need not to ground your visions, but allow them the free
flight of imagination. However, sometimes the drive for spiritual
integration or the longing for ecstatic experiences can cause a
feeling of being out of touch with reality. It is important to
persevere through any feelings of disorientation until a new
sense of balance is discovered—then the grounding of your
vision (or situation) can take place naturally. Use your imagination
and remember to integrate the three agencies: body, mind and
spirit. ‘A White Triangle With Golden Wings’ is a wonderful image
or mandala for meditation. Drawing it on a piece of paper and
hanging it up on the wall may well bring some amazing insights
into the situation or the question that has brought you to the
Oracle. Seeking harmony will cause things to move, sometimes
in a very surprising way!
Keywords: Inspiration and zeal. Feeling elevated and inspired
through spiritual or creative agencies. Flying to a greater
perspective. Taking off. Purity of thought and expression. Angelic
forms. Creative imagination. Self-transcendence. Finding new
dimensions of experience. Illusions of sight. Visions. Untethered
imaginations. Ascension. Ascended beings. Moths. Butterflies.
Flying Machines.
The Caution: Not noticing your own down-to-earth needs
or the needs of those around you. Losing the plot. Escapism.
Forgetting about the requirements and desires of the body.
Being ungrounded. The space cadet. Things that aren’t based
in reality.
You cannot depend on your
eyes when your imagination is
out of focus.
MarkTwain
Love and desire are the spirit’s
wings to great deeds.
Goethe
I know of no more encouraging
fact than the unquestionable
ability of man to elevate his life
by conscious endeavor.
Henry DavidThoreau
Scully:Another Bermuda
Triangle?
Mulder:It’s more like a wrinkle
in time..
The X-Files
He who has imagination
without learning has wings but
no feet.
Horace
You see things as they are and
ask‘Why’?
I dream things as they never
were and ask‘Why not’?
George Bernard Shaw
And I said,oh that I had wings
like a dove! For then would I fly
away,and be at rest.
The Bible
Aries 5

<<<PAGE 29>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
6
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SQUARE BRIGHTLY LIGHTED ON ONE
SIDE
Commentary: ‘A Square Brightly Lighted on One Side’ is a Symbol
of containment, walls and boundaries. A four-sided structure can
lead to feeling contained, boxed in, trapped or claustrophobic in
a place or situation. However, the ‘Square’ of this Symbol is not
completely walled in; it is being lit up ‘On One Side’, which shows
there are solutions and a way out. It indicates creative solutions
are at hand, if one will turn their attention to that possibility.
Oracle: In the situation facing you there’s a need to not concern
yourself too much with one side of an issue, even though you
may feel boxed in with little sign of resolution. Look around with
a positive, problem–solving attitude, and apply simple, active
solutions. There is a way out of your dilemma, although at first
it may not be very obvious. It is important not to surrender to
frustrations and limitations. As an exercise, try drawing an image
of a square with one side not drawn in. Label each of the sides with
a part of the problem that makes you feel trapped and constricted.
What part of your problem, or the solution, could you write in
the fourth ‘Brightly Lighted’ side? What are your possibilities for
free movement in this situation? There is a ‘Lighted’ illumination
and a solution if you turn your attention to it. Moving towards that
‘Light’ and refusing to be limited can lead to a sense of freedom
and security to do what you need to do. Open a window, turn
on a light or open the curtains. Relinquishing the experience of
“bouncing off the walls” will most likely bring you to the place
where you belong and the answers that you seek.
Keywords: Illuminated solutions that provide ways out of tight
situations. Having to put up walls to protect or defend versus
taking down the barriers. Putting all your eggs in one basket.
Feeling fully contained. Walls and fences. Boxes. Understanding
the borders of one’s activities. Looking for stabilization. Lighting
up dark corners. Sunshine. Stepping outside the square or feeling
there is no square. Moving out. Windows and doors. Rubik’s
Cube.
The Caution: Surrendering, feeling trapped. Seeing only one
side. Bouncing around, feeling like there’s no way out. Internal
struggles that prevent seeing solutions. Not acknowledging
or expressing true feelings. Desperately wanting to escape
tight situations. Fear of ambush. Fear of attack from behind.
Claustrophobia. Padded cells. Painting oneself into a corner.
Fresh activity is the only means
of overcoming adversity.
JohannWolfgangVon Goethe
Conformity is the jailer of
freedom and the enemy of
growth.
John F.Kennedy
Within yourself deliverance
must be searched for,because
each man makes his own
prison.
Sir Edwin Arnold
A man will be imprisoned
in a room with a door that’s
unlocked and opens inwards,as
long as it does not occur to him
to pull rather than push.
LudwigWittgenstein
Room Service? Send up a larger
room.
Groucho Marx
There comes a time in a man’s
life when to get where he has
to go–if there are no doors or
windows,he walks through a
wall.
Bernard Malamud
Light can penetrate dark,but
dark can’t penetrate light.
Kryon
It’s futile to gaze at the world
through a car window.
Albert Einstein
Aries 6

<<<PAGE 30>>>
ARIES
E
7
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN SUCCESSFULLY EXPRESSING
HIMSELF IN TWO WORLDS AT ONCE
Commentary: ‘A Man Successfully Expressing Himself in Two
Worlds at Once’ shows someone having the ability to be versatile
and adaptable. When operating in ‘Two Worlds’, one’s life may
seem divided with divergent responsibilities, needs and urges.
As this image implies that this person is ‘Successfully Expressing
Himself’, it shows that this is a time when it is possible, and
probably necessary, to cope with separate or diverse areas of
life.
Oracle: You have the ability, or the challenge, to shift your focus
from one thing to another when it is necessary. There is also the
drive, determination and focus not to run out of energy. However,
there is a need to be careful not to scatter your energies, as
this may lead to wasting time and losing valuable opportunities
for growth. Remember to be versatile and adaptable. There is
often the need for a form of balance between the emotional,
spiritual and material arenas. It’s through being clear and true
to the difference between these two areas, these ‘Two Worlds’,
that great things can be achieved. For instance, one can have
a “straight” job during the day, and be doing something really
unusual during the rest of the time, or live between two homes,
two cities, two relationships, etc. On another level, there could
be a realization of operating on the physical, more everyday level
of your life whilst having messages coming through from more
spiritual realms. You can be successful in anything you undertake
now, as long as you are happy with the compromises that may
be asked of both you and others and the splitting up of areas of
your life. Are you enjoying the best of both ‘Worlds’?
Keywords: Integrating the spiritual with the material. Balancing
things. Doing juggling acts. Moving through people’s lives and
social stratas. Translations of words and thoughts from one area
of life to another. Having separate family situations. Living a
dual life. Being adaptable. Moonlighting. Alternate realities.
Shifting focus when necessary. Versatility. Looking elsewhere.
The Caution: Fooling yourself that you can be all things to
different people, but eventually failing in one or both. Exhaustion
through trying to achieve too much. Deception, if allegiances are
not clear. Infidelity and fickleness. Scattering of interests with
little being achieved. Bigamy. Two-faced. Lies and masquerades.
Feeling like one doesn’t truly fit in anywhere. Not being able to
stop.
Think like a man of action,and
act like a man of thought.
Henri L.Bergson
I’ve been trying for some time to
develop a lifestyle that doesn’t
require my presence.
GaryTrudeau
Any woman who has a career
and a family automatically
develops something in the
way of two personalities,
like two sides of a dollar bill,
each different in design...her
problem is to keep one from
draining the life from the other.
Ivy Baker Priest
There are no elements so
diverse that they cannot be
joined in the heart of a man.
Jean Giraudoux
I’m happy when I’m juggling,
but I feel like I’ve gone from,like,
3 balls to 10 bowling balls.But,
that’s a good problem.I don’t
really have a complaint about
that.
Kirstie Alley
It is the nature of ambition to
make men liars and cheats,to
hide the truth in their breasts,
and show,like jugglers,another
thing in their mouths.
Sallust
Aries 7

<<<PAGE 31>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
8
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN’S HAT WITH STREAMERS
BLOWN BY THE EAST WIND
Commentary: ‘A Woman’s Hat With Streamers Blown By the East
Wind’. The ‘East Wind’ often implies messages or forces coming
in seemingly from out of the blue. These messages could be about
spirit or spiritual teachings. There’s a degree of gentleness here
and adaptability to external forces. Eastern philosophies can come
to mind as a way of thinking through this experience. Indeed,
some of the oriental systems of thought may play a major part
in this situation.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, you may feel as though you’re
being blown a little off course from what you originally set out to
do. This can happen even more if you or someone you’re dealing
with can’t make up their mind, or are constantly shifting their
perspective. There’s a need to adjust continually to the direction
of outside forces. Shifts of mind and attitude may happen as a
result or may, indeed, need to happen. Any changes are best
greeted and considered playfully and lightly. Allow wisdom to
lead you to new and different solutions, but be wary of acting
superficially. Look to see if your mind keeps changing course and
blowing you off center. If you do lose your way temporarily, be
assured that you can be steered back onto the right course with
just a little contemplation on the direction your life is meant to be
taking you. Take your time, be patient and act with the feminine
forces of gentility, grace and dignity. This Symbol indicates that
you are somewhat protected from the more disturbing elements of
your situation. Is someone running after something or someone,
trying to retrieve it whilst it just keeps being ‘Blown’ further
away? In what direction is this ‘Wind’ blowing you?
Keywords: Attuning oneself through Eastern philosophies.
Protective guidance. Balloons and hot-air ballooning. Compasses.
Weather vanes and wind chimes. East meets west. Being adaptable
to the moment. The winds of time and change. Shifts in the
‘Wind’ bringing shifts in attitude or direction. Hats, scarves,
streamers.
The Caution: Only accepting solutions that satisfy selfish or
social needs. Insincere and easily blown around. Fickleness.
Being tossed around by momentary patterns in the “weather”.
Conflicting ideals. Forgetting things in a moment. Being easily
distracted. Changing course midstream. Being blown off the
path, thereby losing ones center or way. Breezes that disturb
ones equilibrium. Losinng yourself in other’s opinions.
I am a feather for each wind
that blows.
William Shakespeare
Our plans miscarry because
they have no aim.When you
don’t know what harbor you’re
aiming for,no wind is the right
wind.
Seneca
Like a kite cut from the string,
lightly the soul of my youth has
taken flight.
IshikawaTakuboku
Distracted by what is far
away,he does not see his nose.
Malagasy Proverb
If the winds of fortune are
temporarily blowing against
you,remember that you can
harness them and make them
carry you toward your definite
purpose through the use of your
imagination.
Napolean Hill
If you pay nervous attention
to other people’s opinions,
maneuver to obtain their
indulgence and to stand high
in their esteem,you will be
whisked about in their winds
and you will lose yourself.
Jo Coubert
A great wind is blowing
and that gives you either
imagination or a headache.
Catherine II
Aries 8

<<<PAGE 32>>>
ARIES
E
9
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SEER GAZES INTENTLY INTO A
CRYSTAL BALL BEFORE HIM
Commentary: ‘A Seer Gazes Intently Into a Crystal Ball Before
Him’ shows the talent, the need and the tools for intense focus and
concentration. The ‘Seer’ sees many things as he ‘Gazes Intently’,
looking for clues through a narrow focus in the ‘Crystal Ball’.
Using a ‘Crystal Ball’ is his method of receiving information from
the world of spirit. By looking deeply into a situation, images can
form and meaning can be revealed. This enhances the ability to
observe things that others may miss.
Oracle: In your situation the whole picture is probably right
before you but you may need help in interpreting its meaning.
With a little concentrated effort, you will be able to see things
more clearly. Find or retrieve information and clues by really
looking at the structure of things. What are you doing and how
are you focusing towards what you really want? The more you
narrow your ‘Gaze’, and the more you trust in your own intuition,
the sharper and clearer the focus will become. What is your
unconscious mind trying to tell you? Find something to focus
on, something beautiful, illuminating or inspiring in some way.
Consider what messages your psyche is trying to bring you. If you
have a dream, write it down. Drawing this Symbol may show an
ability to see things ahead of their time. Tools of divination such
as crystal balls, tarot cards, the runes, the I Ching, the Sabian
Symbols or anything you have at your disposal will help you
find the answers. However, there may be a need for caution if
you are constantly seeking answers from tarot cards, astrology,
clairvoyants, etc. Perhaps you should know when to call a halt,
examining your own goals rather than merely getting answers
from other people. Whatever, be patient and have a good,
long, insightful look. The steadier your ‘Gaze’ the more will be
revealed.
Keywords: Flashes of inspiration. Tuning in and looking within
for answers. Creative visualizations. Aura readings. Cutting
through irrelevant messages. Looking carefully at structure.
Seeking perfection. Clairvoyance. Illumination and deep insights.
Looking ahead to see the signs.
The Caution: Confused by literal meanings. Not seeing the
symbolic message. Always looking this way and that, not at the
center. Getting lost in the big picture. Daydreaming and ignoring
what’s really going on. Obsessing over what may happen. Needing
to know what’s coming up. Being impatient.
The only limits are,as always,
those of vision.
James Broughton
We are always in search of
the redeeming formula,the
crystallizing thought.
Etty Hillesum
People who see a drawing in
the“NewYorker”will think
automatically that it’s funny
because it is a cartoon.If they
see it in a museum,they think it
is artistic;and if they find it in a
fortune cookie they think it is a
prediction.
Saul Steinberg
Everyone sees the unseen in
proportion to the clarity of his
heart,and that depends upon
how much he has polished it.
Whoever has polished it more
sees more — more unseen
forms become manifest to him.
Jalal-Uddin Rumi
Refrain from asking what is
going to happen tomorrow,
and every day that fortune
grants you,count as gain.
Horace
It is said that the present is
pregnant with the future.
Voltaire
The most pathetic person in
the world is someone who has
sight,but has no vision.
Helen Keller
Aries 9

<<<PAGE 33>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
10
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A TEACHER GIVES NEW SYMBOLIC
FORMS TO TRADITIONAL IMAGES
Commentary:‘ATeacherGivesNewSymbolicFormstoTraditional
Images’. This Symbol shows someone who can take a thing or a
situation and transform and update it. The ‘Traditional Images’
can be ideas, objects, icons, beliefs; things we are familiar with.
That a ‘Teacher Gives New Symbolic Forms’ shows the ability to
restructure, reinterpret and present them more in tune with the
times. It indicates a need for a fresh and revitalized perspective
on things. This is what Marc Edmund Jones and Elsie Wheeler did
with the Sabian Symbol “experiment”. This book has taken the
Symbols a step further, giving them further depth and insight.
Oracle: In the situation facing you there’s a need to analyze
and perhaps rewrite what has been observed and learned
in the traditional roles we live out. Things may need a new
interpretation to bring them up to speed with today’s thinking.
Someone in this situation may have truly original ideas, but there’s
a possibility of holding these back, feeling it has all been done
before. The message here is to allow yourself to be creative and
look for modern answers, seeing things in a different light or
from a different angle. This may lead to realizations you have
never even considered or imagined. Bringing out something new
will revitalize your situation and affect those around you. This
can bring new understandings about people and the way things
work. There could be a revisioning of how one sees something
like marriage, work, relationships, education etc. Sometimes this
requires one to be daring, to “step outside the box”. Be prepared
to take a different stance or look at things from a new and fresh
perspective. Don’t stick to limitations, either your own or those
others place on you. You may have to make a stand against those
in a higher or more exalted position that think they know more
than you—perhaps they don’t.
Keywords: New dimensions breaking old thought forms or
behavior. Quantum science. Innovation and re-creation. Working
with educational tools. Finding new inspiration. Being “ahead of
one’s time”. New-age consciousness. Ideas out of the past for the
future. Sticking one’s neck out. Rewriting the book.
The Caution: Rejecting old ideas because they are old instead
of reforming them. Throwing things of worth out, without
examining them. Having little respect for things that are really
worthwhile or traditional. Sticking with the tried and true, no
matter what. Thinking that no one will be interested in your
ideas. Heresy. Dogma.
It is better to fail in originality
than to succeed in imitation.
Herman Melville
Originality does not consist
in saying what no one has
ever said before,but in saying
exactly what you think yourself.
James Stephens
Adam was the only man who,
when he said a good thing,
knew that nobody had said it
before him.
MarkTwain
It is the fate of new truths to
begin as heresies and end as
superstitions.
Thomas H.Huxley
Half my life is an act of revision.
John Irving
Civilization had too many
rules for me,so I did my best to
rewrite them.
Bill Cosby
Great innovators and original
thinkers and artists attract
the wrath of mediocrities as
lightning rods draw the flashes.
Theodor Reik
I have for instance among my
purchases ...several original
Mona Lisas and all painted
(according to the signature) by
the great artist Kodak.
Spike Milligan
Aries 10

<<<PAGE 34>>>
ARIES
E
11
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OR THE RULER OF ONE’S COUNTRY
Commentary: ‘The President’ or the ‘Ruler’ pictures a person
who’s in control, has a sense of authority and is called upon to
do the right thing for his people, his ‘Country’ and indeed, his
position or office. This ‘President’ or ‘Ruler’ has the right, and the
duty, to call the shots in their territory or sphere of operation.
Oracle: This Symbol says that it’s time to take charge, and to
expand your base of operations. There may be a need to take
control and command respect from others by showing that you
have the confidence to make your own decisions. This is your
opportunity to prove that you have the integrity and the necessary
energy to get things done. It’s also a great time to bring a sense
of order and discipline into your life – physically, spiritually or
emotionally. It is important to grasp the boundaries of your
influence and power as this will lead to a strong and renewed
sense of self. Who’s in charge of operations in this situation—is
it you or another? What can you do to strengthen your position
and show that you can be relied upon to get the job done? If
someone is trying to take your sense of individuality and power
away through being bossy and in control, what can be done to
reclaim your authority? Giving your power away to someone can
lead to being taken advantage of in many ways. The undermining
of one’s authority can lead to a loss of position and self-respect.
Stay in a relationship only if it gives you a good sense of yourself.
Whoever is involved in this situation should wield their power
in a careful and thoughtful way. There may be a need to accept
people’s recognition of you as a person in control of your own
life and destiny. Doing this with dignity can lead to a whole new
sense of self, position and personal power.
Keywords: Developing willpower. Inner power, discipline
and integrity. Discipline of thoughts, emotions and actions.
Leadership, power and ability along with their responsibilities.
Accepting responsibility for one’s actions. “Calling the shots”.
Rulers, presidents, leaders. Taking charge. The need for loyal
subjects. Being voted in. The democratic process.
The Caution: Taking control. Lording it over everyone. Being
overbearing. Not allowing others to be in charge of their own lives,
health or situation. Egotistical and self-centered. Undermining
others through a lack of self-awareness or confidence. Being
larger than life. Dictators and tyrants. Military Governments.
What government is the best?
That which teaches us to
govern ourselves.
Goethe
No man is free who is not a
master of himself.
Epictetus
He is free...who knows how
to keep in his own hands the
power to decide.
Salvador De Madriaga
To put the world in order,we
must first put the nation in order;
to put the nation in order,we
must put the family in order;to
put the family in order,we must
cultivate our personal life;and
to cultivate our personal life,we
must first set our hearts right.
Confucius
He that would govern others
first should be the master of
himself.
Philip Massinger
He is not fit to command others
that cannot command himself.
Proverb
I am,indeed,a king,for I know
how to rule myself.
Pietro Aretino
It is a strange desire to seek
power and to lose liberty.
Francis Bacon
Aries 11

<<<PAGE 35>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
12
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FLOCK OF WILD GEESE
Commentary: The ‘Flock of Wild Geese’ is a beautifully inspiring
image of brotherhood and Aquarian ideals. Watching them fly
can inspire feelings of group cohesion and the beauty of natural
rhythms. The ‘Flock’ shows the need to join with others in a
journey or a quest. Remember to take your cue from the ‘Wild
Geese’ – when they fly in formation, they take turns in leading
the way. Likewise, when one gets tired or sick, another takes
the lead.
Oracle: Whilst this is a Symbol of working together with others,
be wary of losing your sense of individuality. There may be a
feeling of wanting to leave behind previous life constraints, to
be able to spread your wings, to seek freedom from difficulties.
However, there’s a need to take note of “seasonal” variations
that are happening around you. Obviously there is a time to
“fly” and a time to relax and recover. You can’t always be on the
go; you must look after your needs for nourishment and sleep.
‘Geese’ are known for forming lifelong partnerships, so marriage
or partnership may indeed be a consideration in this situation.
However, it can sometimes be hard to “ground” relationships.
This Symbol is very much about brotherhood, respect and getting
along with others. Setting out with those of like mind can lead to
an expanded view of life or indeed a whole new adventure. Still,
continually taking off on tangents with others whilst you could
be making more permanent and loyal commitments to the long
term can really test relationships. Remember to be aware of your
responsibilities, to both yourself and others in the group. Know
that there is support out there for you; just ask.
Keywords: Aquarian ideals of brotherhood. Attunement to
planetary rhythms. Spirit liberated from matter. Wanting to take
off by one’s self, but not being able to. Focused group activity
and support. Group mentality, action and agreement. Intuition
and telepathy. Choreography. Camaraderie. “Honking” to egg
each other on. Flying in the slipstream. Responses to seasonal
changes. Migrating at the right times. Travelling. Herds, gangs.
broods. Flying in formation.
TheCaution: Following the leader without knowing where one’s
going. Never knowing where to land, or where to ground oneself.
Wild goose chases. Not recognizing the brotherhood in humanity.
Losing a sense of individual identity. Going off in the wrong
direction. Being lost in the crowd. Beiing one of a gaggle.
Birds of a feather flock together.
Saying
There is a destiny that makes us
brothers,No one goes his way
alone;All that we send into the
lives of others,Comes back into
our own.
Edwin Markham
I met a hundred men going
to Delhi and everyone is my
brother.
Indian Saying
A goose flies by a chart which
the Royal Geographical Society
could not mend.
OliverWendell Holmes
Don’t refuse to go on an
occasional wild goose chase.
That’s what wild geese are
made for.
Henry S.Haskins
Cross in a crowd and the
crocodile won’t eat you.
Malagasy Proverb
Likeness causes liking.
Romanian Proverb
Not the cry,but the flight of the
wild duck,leads the flock to fly
and follow.
Chinese Proverb
Why do you lead me a wild
goose chase?
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
Aries 12

<<<PAGE 36>>>
ARIES
E
13
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BOMB WHICH FAILED TO EXPLODE
IS NOW SAFELY HIDDEN FROM
DISCOVERY
Commentary:‘ABombWhichFailedtoExplode’showspotentially
explosive energies are around which haven’t gone off yet that may
now be ‘Safely’ defused. Things are “safe” from detection, but
dangerous elements are possibly still within. Handling ‘A Bomb’
needs to be done with extreme care and caution. That the ‘Bomb’
is ‘Now Safely Hidden From Discovery’ shows it’s still potentially
explosive, but has somehow been made safe. The duration of the
apparent calm depends on whether the “defusing” is done with
attention to all of the details involved, no matter how small.
Oracle: Has this situation been defused or is still likely to
‘Explode’? Unexploded ‘Bombs’ can be like grenades – ready
to go off at any moment, spraying everyone with shrapnel. The
‘Bomb’ is often something of an emotional nature, but can also be
the suppression of a truth that has emotional side effects. There
may be time to eliminate the impending explosion before it is
discovered, bringing relief and release. If, however, things remain
charged up, the result could be depression or internal anger and
calling in the “bomb squad” may be necessary. This could mean
the help of friends, family, and assistants. Calling in your own
emotional, mental or spiritual ‘Bomb’ squad allows you to take
control of your emotional nature. If a ‘Bomb’ is ‘Discovered’, it may
point to the guilty party who will have to explain their behavior.
Did you plant this ‘Bomb’ or did someone else? Take time to reflect
on rash emotional decisions or situations that, if ‘Exploded’, could
damage much more than was intended. Getting everything under
control and safely out of the way will reveal how you can handle
things. Act with integrity. People involved can learn a lot from
how they react, especially when under pressure.
Keywords: Pressure valves. Getting away with something.
Tantrums and frustration. Tempers that simmer. Explosive
behavior. Bombs, explosions. Sudden and forceful events.
Intelligence organizations, CIA, FBI, ASIO, etc. Valuable lessons of
self-restraint. Relief from problems. Discharging nervous energy.
Security checks. Last minute escapes.
The Caution: Suppressing stress or illness. Doing inappropriate
thingsandthinkingthesecretsafe.Repressingemotions.Undefined
anger. Pressure cooker energy that needs to be released slowly.
Explosions damaging more than expected. Activists. Deception
behind one’s back. Clash of ideals. Terrorism.
Anger will never disappear so
long as thoughts of resentment
are cherished in the mind.
Anger will disappear just as
soon as thoughts of resentment
are forgotten.
Buddha
How much more grievous are
the consequences of anger than
the causes of it.
Marcus Aurelius
“I lose my temper,but it’s all
over in a minute,”said the
student.“So is the hydrogen
bomb,”I replied.“But think
of the damage it produces!”
George Sweeting
I do not like this word“bomb.”It
is not a bomb.It is a device that
is exploding.
Jacques le Blanc—French
ambassador to New Zealand
on Greenpeace’s Rainbow
Warrior bombing.
As in an explosion,I would
erupt with all the wonderful
things I saw and understood
in this world.
Boris Pasternak
When the habitually even-
tempered suddenly fly into a
passion,that explosion is apt
to be more impressive than the
outburst of the most violent
amongst us.
Margery Allingham
Aries 13

<<<PAGE 37>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
14
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SERPENT COILING NEAR A MAN
AND A WOMAN
Commentary: ‘A Serpent Coiling Near a Man and a Woman’
symbolizes the story of the “temptation” of Adam and Eve in the
Garden of Eden. The ‘Serpent’ offered Adam and Eve the gift of
self-knowledge. However, this “knowledge” also revealed to them
that they were naked and that this was sinful. The ‘Serpent’ was
said to have brought them both knowledge and guilt. The “snake”
can be symbolic of anything that induces fear or negativity into
a situation. On the other hand, what the “snake” symbolizes
can bring a healing and a profound sense of, or need for, self-
knowledge. This Symbol can show the celebration of the physical
body and the enjoyment of another through all of the senses.
Oracle: Something or someone may be coming between two
people. ‘A Serpent’ is shown ‘Coiling Near a Man and a Woman’;
this can be a third person or some kind of threat. It can bring
jealousy, resentment, distrust or separation. What comes between
people may be an idea or a belief system, such as the fear of
God. It may be some insight or knowledge that has come to
light; it may be another person or a lover. Temptation, fear and
passion can all too easily get in the way of any relationship, old or
new. It can sometimes be difficult to tell exactly what’s coming
between people; it could be an emotion, psychological condition
or memory. The ‘Serpent’ in this situation is not necessarily in a
threatening pose, yet it can still induce a sense of fear or tension
because of assumptions and prejudice. Snakes by their very nature
don’t have to do anything to be intimidating—they arouse fear,
uneasiness and other, more extreme, reactions by their mere
presence. Maybe one needs to let go of inhibitions in order to
find new depths and ways of relating. If the fear of the “snake”
were to disappear, would you then be able to return to your own
“Garden of Eden”? Alone, or as a couple?
Keywords: Enticement. Allurement. Revealing archetypal
knowledge that may not be “socially acceptable”. Temptations.
The Adam and Eve story. Jealousy. Sexual instincts. Life and death
issues. Relating based on control. Kundalini energy. Realizing
polarity. Individuation. Eating the Apple. The “knowledge of good
and evil”. Having one’s eyes opened. Marking one’s territory.
TheCaution: Feeling guilty. Being afraid to express one’s feelings.
Basic instincts and sexual energy. The fear of knowledge, secret
or otherwise. Using sexuality as a control device. Disgust or
distrust of the body. Sexually transmitted diseases. Hiding nudity
or sexuality. Being thrown out of paradise.
Religion has done love a great
service by making it a sin.
Anatole France
It was from the rind of
one apple tasted that the
knowledge of good and evil as
two twins cleaving together
leaped forth into the world.
John Milton
This desire to govern a woman–
it lies very deep,and men and
women must fight it together
before they shall enter the
garden.
E.M.Forster
Forbidden fruit is sweet.
Traditional Proverb
Adam was human;he didn’t
want the apple for the apple’s
sake;he wanted it because it
was forbidden.
MarkTwain
Adam and Eve had many
advantages,but the principal
one was that they escaped
teething.
MarkTwain
There are several good
protections against temptation,
but the most popular is
cowardice.
MarkTwain
Do not bite at the bait of
pleasure until you know that
there is no hook.
Thomas Jefferson
Aries 14

<<<PAGE 38>>>
ARIES
E
15
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INDIAN WEAVING A BLANKET IN
THE LIGHT OF THE SETTING SUN
Commentary: ‘An Indian Weaving a Blanket’ shows that people
need to take time out to do the things that aren’t particularly
exciting or rewarding on a large scale, but do, however, provide
feelings of contentment, warmth, safety and security. In ‘Weaving
the Blanket’, the ‘Indian’ not only creates something that is useful,
but weaves into it images of their life and history. Often the
patterns and pictures woven into it easily identify the tribe this
‘Blanket’ comes from. Being ‘In the Light of the Setting Sun’,
there may be a feeling of the energy of the light, the ‘Sun’, fading,
leaving little time to achieve what needs to be done.
Oracle: By practicing our skills in an artful way there can be
a celebration and remembrance of the experiences that led to
this moment. Doing one’s chores with enjoyment leads to inner
contentment and a sense of self. In contemplation or meditation
one can find peace, relaxation and a feeling of meaning and
accomplishment. Taking time to do the job well is important,
as is reverence for those things in your possession. Even small
contributions in life are important and your integrity should not
be compromised. A lot of effort goes into ‘Weaving a Blanket’ and
there may be no worthwhile shortcuts to its completion. Do you
need to bring many strands from different areas or parts of your
life together? What materials are available to you? It’s best to relax
into your activities. Take time to enjoy the tranquility of dusk,
possibly catching sight of a sunset. Conditions will change with
time and you can get back to more exciting ventures. Remember
to”weave your dream”.
Keywords: The fabric of one’s being. Traditional pastimes
and skills. Weaving security and independence. Patience and
gentle handcrafting. Stories, especially those handed down.
Tales and traditions. Consideration of one’s unique history.
Weaving, spinning looms. The warp and weft of life. One’s life
story—past and present. Being focused on one’s tasks. Colours,
dyes. Threads.
The Caution: Underestimating skills of self-expression in
comparison with intellectual skills. Allowing dull routines to
overcome. Feeling one hasn’t got much to contribute. Inability
to apply to routine and necessary tasks. Being too “full-time”
about one’s work. Feeling insecure no matter what the situation.
Selling off one’s integrity. Finding that it’s too late in the day to
get anything done. Not knowing when to stop.
Man was made for Joy and
Woe,
And when this we rightly know,
Thro theWorld we safely go.
Joy andWoe are woven fine,
A clothing for the soul divine.
William Blake
We sleep,but the loom of life
never stops and the pattern
which was weaving when the
sun went down is weaving
when it comes up tomorrow.
HenryWard Beecher
Humankind has not woven
the web of life.We are but one
thread within it.Whatever
we do to the web,we do to
ourselves.All things are bound
together.All things connect.
Chief Seattle
For the American Indian,the
ability of all creatures to share
in the process of ongoing
creation makes all things
sacred.
Paula Gunn Allen
Life is what we make it,always
has been,always will be.
Grandma Moses
America is woven of many
strands.I would recognise
them and let it so remain.Our
fate is to become one,and yet
many.This is not prophecy,but
description.
Ralph Gleeson
Aries 15

<<<PAGE 39>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
16
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
BRIGHTLY CLAD BROWNIES
DANCING IN THE WARM DYING
LIGHT
Commentary: ‘Brightly Clad Brownies Dancing in the Warm
Dying Light’ is a wonderful and rather mischievous image.
‘Brownies’ are nature spirits that come to help us with our
work. The concept of ‘Brownies’ has existed in many cultures
for a long time. They lived with humans and sometimes they
were said to live in the attic. They often helped the humans in
the kitchen; they got the fire going by blowing on it, took care
of the human’s children and saw that the food was properly
cooked. But nowadays, with the use of electric machines and
lights, ‘Brownies’ are disappearing more and more. However it
is said some of them still try to stay around. Although mostly
associated with housework, we can call on their help in many
different ways. Nature spirits are often around us, particularly if
we believe in them, welcome them and trust in their presence.
They are ‘Dancing in the Warm Dying Light’ inferring that while
intuitive powers are at a real high, the available physical energy
is not; it is sunset, and the close of the day.
Oracle: You may be feeling tired and in need of help to get
everything, or even anything, done. Have faith, and call on any
assistance you can as this Symbol implies that you will surely
receive it. This Symbol shows that you are being guided and
protected. Friends or people may arrive unexpectedly to help
out at the “last moment”. Sometimes the people who turn up to
help are “strangers”. Trust that things will be okay even if things
feel “too late in the day”. Of course, you could be a ‘Brownie’
for someone else, assisting others when they need it. How about
‘Dancing’? It can refresh and revitalize the spirit and invite love
and light into your life.
Keywords: Reveling in nature. Believing in guides. Fairies and
nature spirits. The wonder and awe of nature. The setting sun.
Last minute preparations before evening. The psychic magic of
dusk. Light that dances. Unseen guardians. Receiving guidance
and help. Seeing the invisible. Help at the last minute. Fairy
godmothers. Questions of: what is the “real” world?
The Caution: Self-delusions. Missing the true picture of what’s
happening in the “real-world”. Losing the plot. Relying on
others, including angels, nature spirits, etc., instead of yourself.
Neglecting responsibilities. Crying wolf. Using people.
The worst thing about work
in the house or home is that
whatever you do is destroyed,
laid waste or eaten within
twenty-four hours.
Lady Kasluck
Housework is what a woman
does that nobody notices unless
she hasn’t done it.
Evan Esar
Housekeeping ain’t no joke.
Louisa May Alcott
Few tasks are more like the
torture of Sisyphus than
housework,with its endless
repetition:the clean becomes
soiled;the soiled is made clean,
over and over,day after day.
Simone de Beauvoir
At worst,a house unkempt
cannot be so distressing as a life
unlived.
Rose Macaulay
For the elemental creatures
go about my table to and fro.
William ButlerYeats
All of us,at certain moments of
our lives,need to take advice
and receive help from other
people.
Alexis Carrel
To the man who himself strives
earnestly,God also lends a
helping hand.
Aeschylus
Aries 16

<<<PAGE 40>>>
ARIES
E
17
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO PRIM SPINSTERS SITTING
TOGETHER IN SILENCE
Commentary: ‘Two Prim Spinsters’ are shown ‘Sitting Together
in Silence’. This Symbol shows people that know and understand
each other, without the need for chatter. Feelings of contentment
can come in time spent with a special friend, someone who you
feel completely at ease with. A real sense of understanding of
what the other is feeling and thinking can be a central quality of
strong companionship. Of course, the ‘Two Spinsters’ may not
be together through choice, but rather through life situations.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, remember that it is easy
to become socially isolated when you hold on to conservative,
judgmental, or moral ideas. Ask yourself if there is a select,
restricted group with whom you are associating. Look for any
opportunities to open you up to deeper and further levels of
communication. Be wary that a false sense of security doesn’t
isolate you from change and growth. People don’t want to
talk to each other if they feel their relationship has become
boring, with nowhere to go and without much of a future. If
people have nothing to say to each other should they spend
their time together? Unresolved issues may be too difficult to
discuss, they can lie beneath the surface causing fear, isolation
and loneliness. ‘Silence’ or quietness can conceal frustration or
feelings of sacrifice and loss. If there are no children in their
lives and they are said to be ‘Spinsters’, unmarried women, is
that an issue? There is an old-fashioned belief which says: It is
important to our friends to believe that we are unreservedly
frank or honest with them and important to friendship that we
are not. That may have suited conditions in the past, but now we
have to be more open, honest and communicative, with others
and with ourselves.
Keywords: The need to loosen up emotional blockages. The
struggle to hold onto one’s original identity. Compromise because
of social expectations. Meditations that communicate. Exclusive
relationships. Relationships that have a quiet “knowing”.
Dignified silence. Inner withdrawal. Communicating through
body language.
TheCaution: Emotionalisolation.Refusingtoacceptrelationship.
Pretending to be someone that one is not. Disapproval of younger,
more vital energies. Being fussy and judgmental. Chattering that
is not conducive to growth or true relating. Gossip. Difficulty
in communicating. Being shutoff, or shutdown. The loss of joy
and spontaneity.
Silence gives consent.
Pope BonifaceVIII
Silence is one of the hardest
arguments to refute.
Josh Billings
When you have nothing to say,
say nothing.
Charles Caleb Colton
Wisdom is knowing when to
speak your mind and when to
mind your speech.
Evangel
The best mirror is an old friend.
Proverb
Television has proved that
people will look at anything
rather than each other.
Ann Landers
For the friendship of two,the
patience of one is required.
Indian Proverb
Good men are scarce.
Proverb
We are growing serious,and let
me tell you,that’s the next step
to being dull.
Joseph Addison
The loneliest woman in the
world is a woman without a
close woman friend.
George Santayana
Aries 17

<<<PAGE 41>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
18
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EMPTY HAMMOCK HANGS
BETWEEN TWO LOVELY TREES
Commentary: ‘An Empty Hammock’ is shown hanging ‘Between
Two Lovely Trees’. The image of the ‘Hammock’ conjures up
the allure of a peaceful and safe environment. It can bring
memories of better days, and of restful periods when there
was an opportunity to enjoy rest and relaxation. The ‘Empty
Hammock’ is an invitation to jump in, relax, and take time out
to enjoy nature. Time spent lounging in the garden or in nature
can revitalize the senses. Often solutions to problems can come
whilst lying in a hammock or enjoying the garden.
Oracle: You may have been too hard on yourself, or others, lately.
It is not a crime to rest or take a short pause, and there should be
no guilt in taking time out in order to regain strength. Emotions,
minds and bodies need relaxation; time to let the weight of life’s
problems lift from our shoulders. You needn’t sacrifice your
opportunity to rest for something or someone else. Look at your
situation and take note of whether you are always on the go. If
so, how can you relax and enjoy your life? Invitations to take a
holiday, or simply rest, are likely to come if you are thinking that
is what you need right now. Has the ‘Hammock’ been beckoning
you for some years? By denying yourself rest you can forget how
to enjoy a moment off, or even fool yourself into not being able to
relax when you do get the opportunity. This Symbol is probably
reminding you that there needs to be some rest right now in
order to maintain harmony. On the other hand, it is possible that
someone has actually been lounging around or goofing off a little
too much lately. A lack of energy or mental or physical motivation
can make the hours go by sometimes very slowly without getting
anything truly productive done. Exercise is as necessary as rest.
Keeping things in moderation is the key.
Keywords: Detachment. Abandonment. Having too much to do
to be able to rest. Issues to do with sleep. Sleeping difficulties.
Planning for days off or for retirement. Hustle and bustle.
Memories of loved ones. Lounging or sitting under trees. Having
permission to stop. Time out. Missing a lover. Beds, sheets,
pillows, sofas. A favorite chair. Holidays. Trees and gardens.
The Caution: Deliberately pushing when in need of rest OR not
being involved in life’s complexities. Dodging responsibilities.
Having nowhere to stay rest or retire. Neglecting time for oneself.
Too much work and no play. Areas of life which are not fulfilled.
Having so much work there’s no time for relationships. Always
being on the go.
Stop and smell the roses.
Old Saying
It is better to wear out than to
rust out.
Richard Cumberland
Sleep is that golden chain that
ties health and our bodies
together.
Thomas Dekker
Laziness may appear attractive
but work gives satisfaction.
Anne Frank
No matter how big or soft or
warm your bed is you still have
to get out of it.
Grace Slick
Leisure time is that five or six
hours when you sleep at night.
George Allen
If you want your dreams to
come true,don’t sleep.
Yiddish Proverb
A change is as good as a
holiday.
Old Saying
He that would thrive must rise
at five;he that have thriven
may lie till seven.
John Clarke
Laugh and the world laughs
with you,snore and you sleep
alone.
Anthony Burgess
Aries 18

<<<PAGE 42>>>
ARIES
E
19
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAGIC CARPET HOVERS OVER
THE DEPRESSING REALITY OF
EVERYDAY LIFE IN AN INDUSTRIAL
AREA
Commentary: ‘A Magic Carpet’ is a wonderfully rich image of
fantasy and escape. That it ‘Hovers Over the Depressing Reality of
Everyday Life in an Industrial Area’ shows the contrast between
life based on material production and consumption, with its
resulting pollution, and the need for escape to the magic and
beauty of life. The ‘Magic Carpet Hovers’—it observes ugliness,
noise and hustle and bustle, without being touched by it.
Oracle: ‘A Magic Carpet’ may be what’s needed in your situation
now. By lifting ourselves above the more ‘Depressing Realities’
that are around us, we can get a better perspective or outcome
about the more difficult issues in our lives. The ‘Magic Carpet’ is
actually a vehicle for your imagination and using your imagination
can elevate your understanding, awareness and existence into
the mystic, sometimes fantastic, realms. With this Symbol there
is a clear message that you have the ability to get above, or even
transcend, worry and strife. Things will be revealed to you if you
allow creative and spiritual truths into your conscious awareness.
Be wary not to underestimate the potential power in the most
ordinary and mundane things; there can be signs of ‘Magic’ in
them. Perhaps you are being an “escapist” or dreaming of the
impossible. Are you trying to use the ‘Magic Carpet’ to see a
greater truth? What new ideas can you materialize into your life
in order to lift you out of where you are now? Try sitting on a
special rug and allow your imagination to fly!
Keywords: Practicing meditation. Finding a vehicle for
transcendence. Elevated views and perspectives. Rising above
problems. Astral travel. Meditation or levitation. Lateral thinking
—‘Magic Carpets’ travel sideways. Rugs, carpets, the Middle
East. Fantasy and fiction. Transcending worries. Escaping the
depressing realities of the everyday world.
The Caution: Self defeating detachment. Not being able to cope
with the real world. Losing one’s self completely in flights of
fancy. The longing for escape. The lure of the exotic. Using drugs
or alcohol in order to escape drudgery or difficulties. Smog. Filthy
air. Feeling stuck. Pollution and muck. Industrial landscapes.
Losing touch with the body and physical realities.
I’ll need a magic carpet to get
out of this one.
Donald Davis
If you surrendered to the air,you
could ride it.
Toni Morrison
Aerodynamically the
bumblebee shouldn’t be able to
fly,but the bumblebee doesn’t
know that,so it goes on flying
anyway.
Mary Kay Ash
If the winds of fortune are
temporarily blowing against
you,remember that you can
harness them and make them
carry you,through the use of
your imagination.
Napolean Hill
Man’s desires are limited by his
perceptions;none can desire
what he has not perceived.
William Blake
A field cannot well be seen from
within the field.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Imagination is a good horse
to carry you over the ground
— not a flying carpet to set you
free from probability.
Robertson Davies
The power of thought—the
magic of the mind!.
Lord Byron
Aries 19

<<<PAGE 43>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
20
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A YOUNG GIRL FEEDING BIRDS IN
WINTER
Commentary: ‘A Young Girl Feeding Birds in Winter’ is an image
of care, innocence, nurturing and benevolence. She brings
nourishment to those who need it – this can be physically,
emotionally or spiritually. It is ‘Winter’, which shows that times
may be lean and food or resources scarce. The ‘Young Girl’ shows
that even when the cold winds are around us, we can find joy
through sharing or doing things for others. Long talks with those
in need, be they family, friends or, indeed, strangers, can bring a
sense of nurturing, reassurance, satisfaction and love.
Oracle: It can be very rewarding to provide love, reassurance
and nourishment to those who need it. Nonjudgmental help can
lead others to trust and respond, whilst little acts of kindness
can improve people’s lives. Things done for others often have an
unexpected spin-off: you can enjoy the sharing and giving, have
fun and feel really good about what you’ve done. Nourishment
can come in the form of food, water, words, advice, etc. There
are, however, those who stubbornly resist moving on or changing
their habits even if it is to their own detriment. Someone needs
help, someone who may even be the cause of his or her own
problems. Continued shows of love and dedication may be
required, even when it may be tiring or time-consuming. What
would really happen if you left or withdrew your time, resources
or energy? Are you stepping out into the cold to help others? Be
careful that what’s being “fed” is in fact nourishing for those
receiving it, and not just feeding co-dependence. There may be
a need to be alone to do simple yet compassionate things. Try
feeding birds outdoors or through open windows and see what
feelings are triggered.
Keywords: Nurturing innocence. Feeding energy to situations
that feel cold, hopeless and lost. Small efforts bringing their
rewards. Co-dependent relationships. Nurturing. Helping those
less fortunate or smaller. Taking time out for others. Doing things
without thought of reward. Enjoying nature. Trying to find friends
or company. Bread and water. Soup kitchens. Counselling. Hot
vs. cold weather.
TheCaution: Wanting to win approval. Creating dependence with
others that has to be maintained. Feeling bleak, lost and alone.
The need to continually rescue others. Doing anything in order
to be liked. Finding it difficult to stop giving. Not being able to
say “no”. Feeling used and unrewarded.
No act of kindness,no matter
how small,is ever wasted.
Aesop
If you always give,you will
always have.
Chinese Proverb
A kind and compassionate act
is often its own reward.
William John Bennett
The greatest wealth consists
in being charitable and the
greatest happiness in having
tranquility of mind...And the
best comrade is one that hath
no desire.
Tibetan Doctrine
Simply give others a bit of
yourself;a thoughtful act,
a helpful idea,a word of
appreciation,a lift over a rough
spot...You take something
out of your mind,garnished in
kindness out of your heart,and
put it into the other fellow’s
mind and heart.
Charles H.Burr
Give a man a fish and you feed
him for one day.Teach a man
to fish and you feed him for a
lifetime.
Chinese Proverb
What is food to one man may
be fierce poison to others.
Lucretius
Aries 20

<<<PAGE 44>>>
ARIES
E
21
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BOXER IS ENTERING THE RING
Commentary: ‘A Boxer’ shows someone with the ability to stand
up, fight or take on a challenge. This person is seen ‘Entering
the Ring’—a place where they need to stand up for something,
tackle an issue or a person; to prove themselves strong in some
measure. Fighting can take many forms, it can be done obviously
or subversively. One can throw punches on every level of
consciousness: physically, spiritually, mentally and emotionally.
Oracle: It may be time to fight about some issue, but it should
be done within the bounds of the ‘Ring’—heeding the rules
and regulations of decency. Make sure you possess the skills
and have earned the right to defend what you believe. Are
“rules” being broken? Is there someone keen to battle? Are they
causing problems? At times it may be appropriate or necessary
to physically “fight”, however signaling your readiness to fight
may cause the other to back down. If you really need to go into
the ‘Ring’ be fully prepared for any consequences. Be aware that
you may need to back off if you are losing ground. Standing up to
something or someone can lead to a new level of self-confidence,
but are you ready for the punches that might be thrown your
way? Use your instincts and watch every movement carefully.
Knowing where the next punch is coming from can help. Who
is the likely victor? Emotionally there are no real winners when
lovers or friends fight—both lose in one way or another. Also, it’s
often others who judge the real outcome or who’s the “winner” in
the end. Are you prepared to lose? It could be a situation of “may
the best man win”. ‘Boxing’ is a sport that owes its pleasures to
people’s glory, bravery, pain and sometimes humiliation; however,
standing up for yourself and your rights can lead to others taking
you more seriously.
Keywords: Physical or psychological self-assertion and
determination. Attack or defense? Fighting for emotional,
psychological or physical space. Being seen as a person of
strength. Throwing punches. Fighting on any level. Being
prepared to take a swing at someone or something. Stepping up
to the plate. Throwing down the gauntlet. Going after the title.
Big vs. small egos.
The Caution: Using force or power to dominate people or those
who challenge. Acting in a combative manner. Not displaying
sportsmanship. Wanting to knock people out. Looking for combat.
Throwing punches at anything. Belting, smacking, invading.
Being punch-drunk.
Power is not revealed by striking
hard or often,but by striking
true.
Honore de Balzac
In fighting and in everyday
life you should be determined
though calm.Meet the situation
without tenseness yet not
recklessly,your spirit settled yet
unbiased.An elevated spirit is
weak and a low spirit is weak.
Do not let the enemy see your
spirit.
Miyamoto Musashi
He that wrestles with us
strengthens our nerves,
and sharpens our skill.Our
antagonist is our helper.
Edmund Burke
Come up with a smiling face,
It’s nothing against you to fall
down flat,but to lie there—
that’s disgrace.
EdwardVance Cooke
He who fights and runs away
may live to fight another day.
Proverb
If you cannot bite,never show
your teeth.
Proverb
Sure there have been injuries
and deaths in boxing—but
none of them serious.
Alan Minter—boxer
Aries 21

<<<PAGE 45>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
22
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE GATE OPENS TO THE GARDEN
OF ALL FULFILLED DESIRES
Commentary: ‘The Gate Opens to the Garden of All Fulfilled
Desires’ is an image rich with future possibilities. This is such
a promising Symbol—it seems limited only by the imagination.
How exciting to think that one could be so close to having all of
their ‘Desires’ fulfilled. This new place or realm of activity sounds
incredibly enticing on many levels. As the ‘Gate Opens to the
Garden’, it leads to potential for growth and rewards.
Oracle: What and where is the place you strive for? It seems
that you have brought yourself to what you want, but there
may still be obstacles. There may be fear about just what ‘All
Fulfilled Desires’ may actually represent. Maybe you already
have everything you need—take a look around and ask yourself
this. Are you ready and willing to accept the rewards? Perhaps
you need to make the deliberate action of opening the ‘Gate’,
allowing entry to where you belong and where you want to be.
It can often be difficult accepting or admitting what we really
want, especially to ourselves. You may be used to (or addicted to)
being in a difficult or unfulfilling situation or relationship. Can
you cope with the more rewarding possibilities that lie beyond
any barriers? As this ‘Gate’ opens (in your mind, your emotions
or literally) you’ll find you’ve come to a new threshold, possibly
a whole new beginning in life. Often there needs to be a pause,
a reflection of how real or rewarding this new place is that you
are about to enter. Perhaps you need to knock first, showing
your clear intention of “wanting in”. Then you can take that step
towards what you want. Be prepared to tend to your ‘Garden of
Fulfilled Desires’.
Keywords: Craving happiness. Gardens and their treasures.
Trellises and flowing plants. Pathways to bliss. Gates and doors.
Unlocking and opening gates and doors. Analyzing your heart’s
desires. The grass being greener on the other side. Rewards and
treasures waiting. The allure of somewhere else. Initiations.
Passages to a better life. Acquiring property. Sexual fulfillment.
Opening up to life’s possibilities and rewards.
The Caution: Feeling or being shut out. Denying yourself the
right to just rewards. Wild ‘goose-chases’. Being afraid of losing
everything. Having everything, but wanting more. Things not
being as real as you imagined. Feeling unhinged. Not having the
materials to make dreams come true. Issues of possession that
separate. Your cup being half-empty or half-full.
Paradise is always where love
dwells.
Jean Paul F.Richter
Pure love and suspicion cannot
dwell together:at the door
where the latter enters,the
former makes its exit.
Alexandre Dumas
When one door closes another
door opens;but we so often
look so long and so regretfully
upon the closed door,that we
do not see the ones which open
for us.
Alexander Graham Bell
If you haven’t all the things
you want,be grateful for the
things you don’t have that you
wouldn’t want.
Anon
Be an opener of doors.
RalphWaldo Emerson
When the doors of perception
are cleansed,Man will see
things as they truly are,infinite.
William Blake
Straight is the gate and narrow
is the way.
The Bible
Opportunities multiply as they
are seized.
SunTzu
Aries 22

<<<PAGE 46>>>
ARIES
E
23
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN IN PASTEL COLORS
CARRYING A HEAVY AND VALUABLE
BUT VEILED LOAD
Commentary: ‘A Woman in Pastel Colors Carrying a Heavy
and Valuable But Veiled Load’ shows someone having to carry,
shoulder or put up with something that is weighing them down.
Although the ‘Load’ may not be comfortable, there is some kind
of perceived reason or reward for hanging onto it. Often in trying
to conceal problems or issues from others, things become more
of a burden. The fact that she’s dressed in ‘Pastel Colors’ reveals
that the ‘Woman’ is a person who doesn’t necessarily want to put
on a dramatic show or draw attention to herself.
Oracle: The ‘Veiled Load’ shows someone going to a great deal
of effort to conceal or cover up something very important.
There could be worry about being “revealed” if anyone (let
alone everyone) found out what’s being covered up. It may
seem they have succeeded in keeping secrets to themself, but
it is probably apparent to others that the burden is affecting
their behavior. Carrying the ‘Load’ may provide a convenient
excuse for not participating in life. However, although it may be
a ‘Heavy Load’ it is also said to be ‘Valuable’ in some measure.
Others may benefit from hearing what needs to be said. Further,
hanging on to upsets from the past can stop the enjoyment of life
in the present. It may be time to share previously private stories,
attitudes or beliefs with others. Enjoying all that one has in life
right now can lift the spirits and release any burdens. To varying
degrees everyone is carrying some sort of ‘Heavy Load’ which
they try to conceal. Going through the day expressing kindness
and courtesy will leave behind a feeling of warmth and good
cheer for others. Positive attitudes and behavior helps to lighten
the ‘Load’ of everyone struggling with their burdens.
Keywords: Privacy. Quiet determination to get on with the
job. Mild manners. Carrying more than one’s share, gratefully
or grudgingly. Shouldering problems. Bad backs. Victim status
– poor me! Secret pregnancies. Doing overtime. Heavy loads.
Smiling against the odds. Pastel colors. Codes of silence.
The Caution: Covering something up. Trying to conceal distrust.
Keeping one’s thoughts and emotions locked-in creating ill
health and disease. Fading into the background. Not being
noticed or recognized. Feeling weighed down with shame, loss
or humiliation. Wearing dark clothes. Dressing in order to cover
up. Being the family scapegoat. Heavy karma.
Truth fears nothing but
concealment.
Proverb
Conceal a flaw,and the world
will imagine the worst.
MarcusValerius Martial
Our lives begin to end the day
we become silent about things
that matter.
Dr.Martin Luther King,Jr.
The deeper the sorrow the less
tongue it hath.
TheTalmud
One stops being a child when
one realizes that telling one’s
trouble does not make it any
better.
Cesare Pavese
The mass of men lead lives
of quiet desperation.What is
called resignation is confirmed
desperation ...a stereotyped
but unconscious despair is
concealed even under what
are called the games and
amusements of mankind.
Henry DavidThoreau
And when a woman’s will is as
strong as the man’s who wants
to govern her,half her strength
must be concealment.
George Eliot
Aries 23

<<<PAGE 47>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
24
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OPEN WINDOW AND A NET
CURTAIN BLOWING INTO THE SHAPE
OF A CORNUCOPIA
Commentary: ‘An Open Window and a Net Curtain Blowing
into the Shape of a Cornucopia’ is a Symbol of abundance and
prosperity. Abundantia was a Roman goddess of abundance,
prosperity and good fortune. She has the ‘Cornucopia’, the “horn
of plenty”, from which she distributes grain, money, fruits, flowers
and food. In fact, all that one truly wants is represented as sitting
in the “horn”. The wind blows in the ‘Open Window’ and reminds
us of the beauty, joy and richness of life.
Oracle: We often long for what we want and this Symbol shows
that something is most probably coming your way. ‘An Open
Window and a Net Curtain’ suggests that with the slightest
change of direction in the wind, our fortunes can change. Quite
possibly something is coming that has many promises. What
actually arrives on your doorstep may or may not be exactly what
was wished for, but it is very likely to be somehow rewarding.
How wonderful and yet surprising would it be if what you wanted
actually did manifest? This could be a time of the realization and
enjoyment of layers of spiritual nourishment. The ‘Blowing’ of
wind often implies spiritual agencies coming in. ‘Open’ your
mind to the possibilities that are being ‘Blown’ in from the realm
of spirit. The rewards can be plentiful, full of promise and self-
sustaining. Be wary, however, of merely drifting and imagining
that the big jackpot is going to just fall out of the sky. Buying the
ticket helps to win the lottery. Look for unusual or extraordinary
opportunities in the signatures of things around. Picture what
you want and project it out into the world with the full intention
of it being fulfilled. What you want may just manifest itself in
front of you.
Keywords: Imagination. Keeping your options open. The promise
of fruition. The breath of life filled with inspiration. Realizing that
in everyday life, one has it all. Windows of opportunity. Gain,
abundance, riches. Spiritual energies pouring in. Concentrated
energy. Seeing desires taking shape. Curtains and windows.
The Caution: Relying on spiritual ideas to provide material
sustenance. Dreaming of things dropping into one’s lap. Hoping
that good luck will just ‘blow in’. Shutting windows, keeping
light and life out. Drawing curtains and withdrawing. Promises,
promises.
Every separate thought takes
shape and becomes visible in
color and form.
Liu Hua-Yang
Wishes expand in direct
proportion to the resources
available for their gratification.
Robert Dato
The charitable give out the door
and God puts it back through
the window.
Proverb
When God closes a door He
opens a window.
Anon
Strange things blow in through
my window on the wings of the
night wind and I don’t worry
about my destiny.
Carl Sandburg
If opportunity doesn’t knock,
build a door.
Milton Berle
There is no one,says another,
whom fortune does not visit
once in his life;but when she
does not find him ready to
receive her,she walks in at the
door,and flies out the window.
Charles Montesquieu
Certain winds will make one’s
temper bad.
George Eliot
Aries 24

<<<PAGE 48>>>
ARIES
E
25
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A DOUBLE PROMISE REVEALS ITS
INNER AND OUTER MEANINGS
Commentary: ‘A Double Promise Reveals its Inner and Outer
Meanings’ implies that what may at first have appeared to be
simple will probably end up being more complicated than
was first imagined. Things may look great on the outside, but
internally there could be complications that should be considered.
There may need to be an honest appraisal of what was actually
said, thought or ‘Promised’, and what is actually possible in the
real world.
Oracle: It may seem as though there are so many possibilities
coming that could change your life on many levels, but ‘Promises’
are often more complicated than we initially think. Is this a
situation with integrity or is it laced with duplicity? Look carefully
at any ‘Promises’, or outcomes, that were assured or perhaps
assumed in this situation. Did you expect more than was actually
delivered? One’s rational understanding and emotional desires
and responses can often conflict with each other. Consider
the effects of the ‘Promise’ on all levels of your being. What
comprehension, thoughts and emotions do you have surrounding
what was said or implied? This Symbol often indicates a choice
that arises between the heart and doing what you want to do
and social obligation and knowing what’s right. There is much
to be realized and learnt from the situation that has led you to
the Oracle. There may be a need to draw another Symbol to get
further information, to clarify and refine your direction.
Keywords: Rewards, but what do they bring with them? The
possible implications of or reasons for any promises. Something
that may look good on the outside, but prove to be difficult.
Looking for consensus. Possibilities and promises. The ins and
outs of situations. Not turning up. The need to look at situations
from all sides. Internal vs. external realities. Catch-22 situations.
Contracts.
TheCaution: Fickleness, insincerity and two-facedness in human
relationships. Expectations without clarification. Reversals of
decisions or promises. Duplicity. Manipulating people in order
to achieve outcomes. Promising more than can be delivered.
Endeavours or projects that are not worth the effort. Lies and
misleading statements. Having a hidden agenda. Momentary
pledges that are soon forgotten. Contracts that bind.
A wise man hears one word and
understands two.
Yiddish Proverb
Danger and delight grow on
one stalk.
Scottish Proverb
The reverse side also has a
reverse side.
Japanese Proverb
What a difference there is
between what we say and what
we think.
Jean Racine
We must not promise what we
ought not,lest we be called on
to perform what we cannot.
Abraham Lincoln
What’s important is promising
something to the people,
not actually keeping those
promises.The people have
always lived on hope alone.
Hermann Broch
All promise outruns
performance.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Words are words,explanations
are explanations,promises are
promises but only performance
is reality.
Harold S.Geneen
Never promise more than you
can perform.
Publilius Syrus
Aries 25

<<<PAGE 49>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
26
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN POSSESSED OF MORE GIFTS
THAN HE CAN HOLD
Commentary: ‘A Man Possessed of More Gifts Than He Can
Hold’ is an image of a wonderful abundance of gifts, talents or
possessions. The words ‘More Than He Can Hold’ imply that it’s
rather difficult to keep or contain all of these great things at once.
Perhaps some things need to be let go of. In this Symbol ‘Gifts’ can
refer to talents, possessions, people, possibilities, status, etc.
Oracle: This Symbol is about gifts of all kinds. As it talks about
‘More Gifts Than He Can Hold’, it suggests that we need to
realize that sometimes we can’t have and hold everything to
ourselves. There may be so much to possess. We may need to let
go of something in order to make space for new things in our
lives. There are, however, a lot of good things that can be ‘Held’.
This Symbol implies being prepared to give up, or put aside
something or someone, in order to pursue something else or to
have a desired outcome. Having many great ideas and ambitions
is wonderful, but it can keep us from really achieving anything;
life can become unfocused or distracted by too many possibilities.
Feeling weighed down by and keeping tabs on your possessions
can be tiring. The best way to get things done is to do them one
at a time. Recognize that you are surrounded by abundance, but
you may be unable to experience it all at once. The aim is to
appreciate those things you can do or achieve now and not feel
bad about the things you can’t. If you feel you don’t have the
ability to cope, look into your “storehouse”. You will be surprised
at what talents you have probably never used. Just remember that
you can’t do and have everything at once.
Keywords: Potentials and the obsessions they can bring.
Obsessions about “having things” or achieving goals. Counting
one’s blessings. Jack-of-all-trades. Having to drop the bundle if
one more thing is added. Being talented and blessed. Enormous
responsibilities. Wanting to contain all possibilities. Storage. So
many things to do—so little time.
The Caution: Not being able to focus on one issue at a time, or
on ideas of real worth and therefore not really achieving anything.
Inability to gain or contain everything that is desired. Ambition
that knows no bounds. Greediness and insatiability. Being told
that you can’t have what you want. Things piling up. Juggling and
dropping the ball. Feeling as though you will lose everything.
Being overwhelmed with possibilities.
A full cup must be carried
steadily.
Old Saying
Everyone has inside himself a
piece of good news!The good
news is that you really don’t
know how great you can be,
how much you can love,what
you can accomplish,and what
your potential is!
Anne Frank
A wise man will make more
opportunities than he finds.
Francis Bacon
You must learn day by day,
year by year,to broaden your
horizon.The more things
you love,the more you are
interested in,the more you
enjoy,the more you are
indignant about,the more
you have left when anything
happens.
Ethel Barrymore
And the wild regrets and the
bloody sweats None knew so
well as I:For he who lives more
lives than one,more deaths
than one must die.
OscarWilde
He was one of those men who
possess almost every gift,
except the gift of the power to
use them.
Charles Kingsley
Aries 26

<<<PAGE 50>>>
ARIES
E
27
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THROUGH IMAGINATION,A LOST
OPPORTUNITY IS REGAINED
Commentary: ‘Through Imagination, a Lost Opportunity is
Regained’ implies an opportunity to set something right that was
thought to be gone or past any hope of recovery. The power of
the mind and the imagination are the best tools to use to retrieve
this issue. This symbol shows that by using creative ideas, the
very thing that was ‘Lost’ can be brought back into reality.
Oracle: You will have to summon up your talent and energy to
recapture what has been ‘Lost’ to you. This can be about jobs,
relationships, creative ideas, possesions, anything. Use your
creative energy to revitalize an idea or opportunity, even if it
seems to be hopeless. Even if you don’t get exactly what you want,
you will probably feel an incredible sense of relief as things are
put back on track again. You need to believe that it is possible to
recapture what you thought was gone. Create an image in your
mind; imagine yourself with this ‘Lost Opportunity Regained’ then
you will most likely succeed in your objectives, at least on some
level. Visualizing what you want, allowing time and watching for
it to manifest can bring astounding results. Just about anything
can be recovered when this Symbol is around, but you must put
some energy into it, particularly using your ‘Imagination’. Timing
may be important in this situation and you might need the help
of others along the way. Finding ways to get the results you want
may take time, or it could indeed happen overnight. Listen to
your imagination and intuition and let creative solutions to your
problems rise up from within. Remember, though, that often our
rewards are different from what we first imagined.
Keywords: Creative imagination and visualization. Hopes
renewed when all seemed lost. Second chances. Last minute
reprieves. Retracing your steps. Judging things to be positive
when once they were thought to be negative. Being exonerated
or forgiven. Pardons giving release. Imagineering. Retrieving
things. Making up for lost ground or time. Changing your mind
therefore changing your outcome.
The Caution: Relying on self-pity. Denying the imagination to
recover the situation. Not noticing solutions to problems. Letting
chances for recovery disappear through inaction or laziness.
Going over and over lost opportunities. Finding it impossible to
let go. Staring at loss and not realizing what one has.
Just think how happy you
would be if you lost everything
you have right now,and then
got it back again.
Frances Rodman
The ultimate function of
prophecy is not to tell the
future,but to make it.
Joel A.Barker
There is no use trying,said Alice;
one can’t believe impossible
things.I dare say you haven’t
had much practice,said the
Queen..Why,sometimes
I’ve believed as many as six
impossible things before
breakfast.
Lewis Carroll
Opportunities are never lost;
they are taken by others.
Anon
In a minute there is a time for
decisions and revisions which a
minute will reverse.
T.S.Eliot
Lest he should wander
irretrievably from the right
path,he stands still.
William Hazlitt
A mind once stretched by a new
idea never regains its original
dimension.
OliverWendell Holmes
Aries 27

<<<PAGE 51>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
28
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGE DISAPPOINTED AUDIENCE
Commentary: ‘A Large Disappointed Audience’ implies that
a performance of some kind or something that was done was
not what was wanted or expected. People have witnessed or
experienced something that was a ‘Disappointment’ or a letdown.
It’s hard to know just what or how much the ‘Audience’ was
expecting, but it is clear that they weren’t happy with the
performance or outcome.
Oracle: You might feel as though you or someone else has failed
and left others wanting. But how much is this because too much
was expected in the first place? The ‘Audience’ only remembers
the last performance, so get up and try again, but this time be
more realistic. Be aware that in drawing this Symbol you may
be an observer (in the ‘Audience’), or you may even be your
own ‘Audience’. Does this picture a situation where you are
living through the responses you receive from others? Do you
feel that you’ve let yourself down? Sometimes it is necessary
to acknowledge when an idea or action needs to be dropped
or stopped, to be able to cut your losses. Still, getting mentally
and emotional psyched up for something enjoyable and worthy
can bring rewards, especially if you lower the expectations of
the end result. Quick realizations of things as they really are
can bring a sense of hope for a better outcome next time. We
need to remember that we often project our own thoughts
and expectations onto others; perhaps we can actually learn
something more from failure than from success. Watch your
reactions to the situation facing you, and see what comes up. What
can you learn from observing your and others’ expectations? How
strongly do you expect them to be fulfilled?
Keywords: Adjustments of expectations bringing realizations
about what is really possible. Expecting the response of others.
Walking out during a performance. Not listening to something
through a lack of interest. Anticipating a different result from
what is delivered. Relying on feedback. Lines and queues of
people. Criticism. The need to inspire and enthuse.
TheCaution: Feeling sad, sorry or letdown because of defeat and
frustration. A lot of people left feeling emotionally “wiped-out”.
Shattering of illusions. Fickleness. The attitude that one can’t
do anything. Everything being out of one’s control. Watching
what’s going on and not participating. Being at the mercy of the
whims and fancies of others. Judging and analyzing oneself or
others. Too many people crammed into one spot. Not getting a
seat. Refusal of entry. Booing and hissing.
It is always better to fail in
doing something than to excel
in doing nothing.
Anon
There is luxury in self-reproach.
When we blame ourselves,we
feel no one else has a right to
blame us.
OscarWilde
Nothing is enough for the man
to whom enough is too little.
Epicurus
We are ever striving after what
is forbidden,and coveting what
is denied us.
Ovid
People ask for your criticism,
but they only want praise.
Somerset Maugham
Plato was a bore.
Friedrich Nietzsche
StupidTV.Be more funny.
Homer Simpson
A bad review is even less
important than whether it is
raining in Patagonia.
Iris Murdoch
The greatest mistake you can
make in life is to be continually
fearing you will make one
Elbert Hubbard
Aries 28

<<<PAGE 52>>>
ARIES
E
29
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Listen within yourself and look
into the infinitude of Space and
Time.There can be heard the
songs of the Constellations,the
voices of the Numbers,and the
harmonies of the Spheres.
The Divine Pymander
All a musician can do is to
get closer to the sources of
nature,and so feel that he is in
communion with the natural
laws.
John Coltrane
There’s music in the sighing
of a reed;there’s music in the
gushing of a rill;there’s music
in all things,if men had ears:
Their earth is but an echo of the
spheres.
Lord Byron
The heavenly motions...are
nothing but a continuous song
for several voices,perceived not
by the ear but by the intellect,
a figured music which sets
landmarks in the immeasurable
flow of time.
Johannes Kepler
Every action of our lives touches
on some chord that will vibrate
in eternity.
Edwin Hubbel Chapin
Among whom the gods bless,
high on the list are the music
people,who tune into celestial
vibe-brations and give mortals
a taste of immortal sensations.
Ruby Dee
THE MUSIC OF THE SPHERES
Commentary: ‘The Music of the Spheres’ is a beautiful image of
music and harmony. It implies harmonies in sounds of all kinds.
In this Symbol, the words ‘The Spheres’ refer to the planets in our
solar system. The scholar Pythagoras observed that the pitch of
notes or sounds depends on the rapidity of vibrations, and also
that the planets move at varying rates of motion. He concluded
that the sounds made by their movement vary according to these
different rates of motion. Kepler said of this “I grant you that no
sounds are given forth, but I affirm...that the movements of the
planets are modulated according to harmonic proportions.” Since
all things in nature are harmoniously made, different sounds
can harmonize. The combination of these sounds he called ‘The
Harmony of the Spheres’.
Oracle: This is a particularly intuitive Symbol. It appears that it
doesn’t matter if things are going well or not, if you are in tune
with your own inner voice, this can be a time of at-one-ment or
attunement with your path. Listening to the ‘Music’ around you
can open up messages from your own inner voice. The beauty
of cycles that go round and round, as seen through the lens of
astronomy and astrology, can lead to an understanding of the
rhythms of nature and the seasons. Natural cycles revolve,
meshing precisely like the gears in a clock. We each have a musical
voice, our unique sound. We join with others in harmony and
the voices together create alchemy. Sing, ring a bell, play some
music, use Tibetan bowls for their beautiful tones. Listen to the
words of songs to receive messages that are relevant to you. Being
in harmony with your surroundings can bring rewards both seen
and unseen.
Keywords: Voices bringing messages. Attuning to the messages
inherent in astrology. Harmonies, chords, keys, octaves, tones.
Things heard. Natural harmony of life. The beauty of the planets.
The measurement of time. Circadian rhythms. Dancing to the
wind. The humming of bees. Days of the week. The sound of
water over rocks or crystals. The planets speaking through or to
you. Sending love. The atomic clock. Harmonics. Musical ratios.
Numbers. Numerology. Sound healing.
TheCaution: Inflating rational ideas. Delusion or enlightenment?
Getting lost in abstractions. Rejecting what’s obvious on an
intuitive level in favor of more intellectual answers. Loving the
sound of your own voice. Not listening to obvious messages.
Aries 29

<<<PAGE 53>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
E
30
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A DUCK POND AND ITS YOUNG
BROOD
Commentary: ‘A Duck Pond and its Young Brood’ can indicate
issues of belonging to a family, clan or tribe. The ‘Duck Pond’
is a place where a family can live, forage for food, gather life’s
necessities and be safely together. The parents, or at least the
mother ‘Duck’, needs to look after the ‘Brood’ to ensure that
they are kept together, nourished and protected. Guidance and
direction need to be given so the youngsters grow into mature
and responsible adults.
Oracle: You may feel restricted and bound in by reality, but you
probably also feel safe. Every day can hold some type of adventure,
but it is always within limits. Family, friends and the environment
around us often set these limits. The mother figure needs to be
strong and vigilant to see that all is well with her ‘Young Brood’.
She needs to take great care in directing them in life so that they
grow and flourish both as a family and out there in the real world
as individuals. Is this ‘Duck Pond’ inviting to others, or do some
‘Ducks’ scare off others who try to come near? Who belongs and
who doesn’t? Who’s invited to visit for a while, but then expected
to leave when their time is up? It’s quite natural to sometimes
feel threatened when people who don’t “belong” call or barge in
unannounced, but an accommodating ‘Duck Pond’ should be able
to have differing types living in quiet safety together. Sometimes
we need to remind ourselves of the comforting things around us
and the people who really belong with us. Are you looking after
those in your care?
Keywords: Nurturing family. Contentment. Realizing limitations.
Reliability. The problems and joys in the responsibilities of having
a brood to look after. Finding friends or family that enrich
one’s life. Psychoanalysis. Family patterns and analysis. Family
support. The family sphere. Feeling safe in one’s environs. Being
the mother duck. Adoption and foster families. Communes and
communities. Facing the music that you’ve composed.
The Caution: Denying your own needs for others in the ‘Brood’.
Narrow-minded attitudes. Not inviting others in. Feeling stuck.
Not wanting to leave the nest, grow up or take risks in life. Feeling
left out and alone. Smugness or exclusivity. All looking the same
and no one standing out as individuals. Being lost in the crowd.
Distrusting those that are “alien”. Borders erected to keep out
“foreigners”.
There are only two lasting
bequests we can hope to give
our children.One of these is
roots,the other,wings.
Hodding Carter
Birds of a feather flock together.
Proverb
Where can a person be better
than in the bosom of their
family?
Marmontel Gretry
Always behave like a duck–keep
calm and unruffled on the
surface but paddle like the devil
underneath.
Jacob Braude
A baby is an inestimable
blessing and bother.
MarkTwain
Each thought that is welcomed
and recorded is a nest egg by
the side of which more will be
laid.
Henry DavidThoreau
God stirs up our comfortable
nests,and pushes us over the
edge of them,and we are
forced to use our wings to save
ourselves from fatal falling.
Read your trials in this light,
and see if your wings are being
developed.
HannahWhitall Smith
Aries 30

<<<PAGE 54>>>
TAURUS
R
3­
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CLEAR MOUNTAIN STREAM
FLOWS STEADILY DOWNSTREAM
Commentary: ‘A Clear Mountain Stream Flows Steadily
Downstream’ in a path ultimately to the sea. The ‘Mountains’ are
the source of all the oceans and, like the ‘Stream’, life is a process
of change from the cradle to the grave. A ‘Stream’ must follow its
sure course even if it gets distracted from its goal, as can happen
when the flow of water is diverted by something or someone. As
it ‘Flows Steadily Downstream’, nothing can really stop its ultimate
direction. If it is stopped or dammed, it accumulates immense
energy, and will practically burst to keep going. The water just
goes on, over, under, around, forever onward.
Oracle: There may be a need to choose a course and then not
deviate from it. This will help to nourish and inspire confidence in
yourself and those around you. There is likely to be some type of
tradition and strength behind you. Realize that many came before
you and you are a part of their story. You can become fresh, vibrant
and revitalized from your own spiritual source. Be wary of standing
still in this situation as still water can become stagnant. Further,
icy feelings and being alienated from others will invite trouble
further down the line. Set a course and go with the flow. As you get
closer to your objective you will probably find you have a growing
supply of impetus and power. Keep moving toward your goal while
remembering to cultivate warmth and acceptance with all that
you meet along the way. However, this Symbol can also describe
a person that refuses to do anything other than what they have
in mind. Having tunnel vision about one’s direction can alienate
others. Performing your tasks with focused vitality will be positive
and productive. Picture a ‘Stream’ flowing downhill, going around
any obstacles and finding its true course.
Keywords: Remaining fluid. Flowing energy. Pure sources,
nourishment and refreshment. Sure sense of direction. “Untainted”
blood lines. Purifying one’s thoughts, ideas and beliefs. Things set in
train from upstream. Water. Dams. Water as a resource. Purification.
Cleaning and cleansing. Pipelines. The spiritual dimensions of
water. Baptism. Elemental knowledge. Traffic. Flowing crowds of
people. Going against the tide.
TheCaution: Aimlessness. Aloofness. Feelings of physical, spiritual,
racial or intellectual purity that can lead to smugness, bigotry or a
false sense of superiority. Ice cold feelings and responses. Not taking
notice or being concerned about another’s feelings. Cold ambition.
Mud and sediment. Pollutants. Algae. Stagnants moments.
Taurus 1
Everything flows and nothing
abides;everything gives
way and nothing stays fixed.
Heraclitus
You will live your life secure
in that you are no longer
manipulated by what other
people want you to do and be,
but are directed by your own
inner desires.
H.Stanley Judd
You can never enter the same
river twice.
Indian Proverb
No river can return to its source,
yet all rivers must have a
beginning.
Native American Proverb
Ideas are refined and multiplied
in the commerce of minds.In
their splendor,images affect
a very simple communion of
souls.
Gaston Bachelard
It isn’t pollution that is hurting
the environment;it’s the
impurities in our air and water
that are doing it.
Dan Quayle
The fountains of sacred rivers
flow upwards.
Euripides
Time is but the stream I go a-
fishing in.
Henry DavidThoreau

<<<PAGE 55>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
3­
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Taurus 2
Lightning is the shorthand of a
storm,and tells of chaos.
Eric Mackay
The difficulties we experience
always illuminate the lessons
we need most.
Anon
The best lightning rod for your
protection is your own spine.
RalphWaldo Emerson
I’d rather be a lightning rod
than a seismograph.
Ken Kesey
Knowledge does not come to us
in details,but in flashes of light
from heaven.
Henry DavidThoreau
Nothing in life is more exciting
and rewarding than the sudden
flash of insight that leaves you
a changed person—not only
changed,but for the better.
Arthur Gordon
His intelligence seized on a
subject,his genius embraced it,
his eloquence illuminated it.
Paterculus
And God said:Let there be light:
and there was light.
The Bible
Where God and Nature met in
light.
Lord AlfredTennyson
AN ELECTRICAL STORM
ILLUMINATES THE HEAVENS AND
THE FORESTS
Commentary: ‘An Electrical Storm’ can really wake us up.
Sometimes it comes out of the blue, when we’re not expecting it.
As it approaches there is a strong buildup of energy and things can
become stuck and static. There is a feeling of something pending;
the tension and promise of a breaking point occurring at any
minute. As it ‘Illuminates the Heavens and the Forests’, it sheds
flashes of light on the environment or the immediate situation.
It often happens that the cleansing promise of rain is held back
momentarily while the 'Electrical' power of the situation seems
to take over everything.
Oracle: This situation will most likely change from what it first
appeared to be. You may actually have little influence over what
is being unleashed. In the meantime, there’s a need to keep a cool
head while observing everything around. Eventually the energy
will dissipate and you will regain control: physically, mentally or
emotionally. Lightning is a powerful ‘Electrical’ energy, and brilliant
flashes of intuition can come when it is unleashed. This Symbol says
that the ‘Electrical Storm Illuminates the Heavens and the Forests’;
with a sense of added awareness, it brings insight and ‘Illumination’
to a high point of focus. Things that have not been obvious before
are likely to become much clearer to you, sometimes crystal clear.
Paths out of confusion can suddenly be revealed. Pay attention, as
this can be in short grabs. Things will seem better if you feel safe
in your environment and with the people around you. Keep your
eyes wide open. Don’t worry about losing control, as the ‘Electrical
Storm’ will pass relatively quickly, possibly leaving you in a better
place and a fresh state of mind.
Keywords: Reverence for the forces of nature. Loud cracks, flashes,
and bangs that clear the air. Flashes of insight. Tension and its
release. Electrical conductors. The sense that all hell is going to
break loose. Short circuits of mind or emotions. Electricity failures.
Crackling emotions. Flashes in quick succession. Bursts of energy.
Light changing. Psychic clearing. Hot flushes. Surges.
The Caution: Being frozen in fear just when one needs to spur
to action. Losing control. Being distracted by surroundings. Not
being completely aware of all the potential dangers. Worry that
overtakes and engulfs. Chaos in the brain. Nervous reactions.
Things changing quickly. Brilliance that is quickly or easily lost.
Power blackouts.

<<<PAGE 56>>>
TAURUS
R
33
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
NATURAL STEPS UP TO A LAWN
BLOOMING WITH CLOVER
Commentary: ‘Natural Steps Up to a Lawn Blooming With
Clover’ implies ‘Steps’ that are inviting, promising and easy to
climb. It feels as though they’re leading to the promise of beauty,
greenery and repose. They are ‘Blooming With Clover’, which
shows there is a reward at hand when those ‘Steps’ are taken.
Bees love ‘Clover’ and ‘Lawns Blooming With It’ ensures that the
bees will make honey and therefore life will be sweet. Clover has
long been believed to mean good luck, prosperous circumstances
and luxurious surroundings. Also, the expression “he’s in clover”
or “living in clover” comes from the belief that if you had plenty
of ‘Clover’ for your cows to eat, they would produce good milk,
thereby providing nourishment for everyone.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that a time of fulfillment and
completion is close, but there is still some small effort to be
made to attain what you want or need. You must take the ‘Steps’,
even though they may be simple, to achieve what you want or
to arrive where you want to be. There is definitely a need to put
some effort into getting what you want but it’s probably not going
to be too difficult or hard going. Be on the alert for laziness and a
“come what may” attitude. Regardless of what others are doing,
keep going the way you are, following your natural intuition and
you will find, or achieve, what you have in sight. Rewards can be
just a few ‘Steps’ away. It may be worth remembering that this
landing in the ‘Clover’ may only be temporary, as there will be
new things to do and further things to strive for. You may not
have found your ‘Pot of Gold at the End of the Rainbow’ just yet,
but you are most likely on the right path.
Keywords: Hopefulness. Inspirational possibilities. Gradually
enlarging one’s vision. Harmony. Seasonal changes. Running
around on grass. Bare feet. The beauty of greenery and flowers.
Stability on the path. Steps that invite one on to bigger and better
things. Abundance, nourishment. Making small efforts that can
lead to large returns. Places to spread out and relax. Having plenty
of room to move. Gardens and parks.
The Caution: Looking for the easy way out. Not making the
effort to find what is just a few steps away. Being lazy when one
should be going for the objective. Temporary success. Expecting
everything to be laid out before you. Weeds. Unkempt lawns.
Neglected land.
Taurus 3
Like the bee that now is blown
honey-heavy on my hand,from
his toppling tansy-throne,in the
green tempestuous land—I’m
in clover now,nor know who
made honey long ago.
Edmund Blunden
Sweet scents of summer air
breathing over fields of beans
or clover;the perfume of wet
leaves or moss;the life of
waving trees,and shadows
always changing.
Charles Dickens
The reason so many people
never get anywhere in life is
because when opportunity
knocks,they are out in the
backyard looking for four-leaf
clovers.
Walter Chrysler
Talk to him of Jacob’s Ladder
and he would ask the number
of the steps.
DouglasWilliam Jerrold
I like the man who faces what
he must,With steps triumphant
and a heart of cheer;Who fights
the daily battle without fear.
Sarah Knowles Bolton
What a miserable thing life is:
you're living in clover,only the
clover isn't good enough.
Bertolt Brecht

<<<PAGE 57>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
34
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE POT OF GOLD AT THE END OF
THE RAINBOW
Commentary: ‘The Pot of Gold at the End of the Rainbow’ is
a wonderful image. ‘Rainbows’ are said to be a bridge to the
Divine. They inspire awe as we gaze at their beauty and the
sheer wonder of nature. They can represent boundless promise,
and there is said to be a reward, a ‘Pot of Gold’, to be found at
its end. In folklore, elves, leprechauns and fairies are associated
with ‘The Pot of Gold’.
Oracle: The quest to find our ‘Pot of Gold’ is very tempting but it
can be forever elusive because it appears to move as we move or as
we change our perspective. However, we all have our dreams and
with a little concentrated effort we can reach our own version of
the ‘Pot of Gold’. It can imply riches and rewards on many levels,
sometimes beyond our wildest dreams. There may be a need to
reflect on just what exactly these “riches” are. The promise of the
‘Pot of Gold’ entices us, but this can also be the cause of problems
if we forget other more important things in life. Some people want
material or spiritual riches without putting in any hard work. This
way of thinking may lead one astray. Although some people can
earn their way through life on a wing and a prayer, most have
to put in a true effort to succeed. Often it is not the finding of
the elusive ‘Pot of Gold’ at the ‘Rainbow’s End’ that is the real
reward, but the rewards found during the search and the wonder
the ‘Rainbow’ creates as it links heaven and earth. Perhaps there
is a constant search for rewards without recognizing the riches
that are already at hand. In this situation, many rewards can
come from creative and spiritual efforts – just be a little wary of
expecting too much. Picture a ‘Rainbow’ in your mind, see ‘The
Pot of Gold’; and hold it in your memory bank – this will sustain
you and may indeed lead you to your reward.
Keywords: The promise of riches, in whatever forms these
may take. Creative imagination. Goals and ambitions. Alchemy.
Splashes of color. Rewards contained. The search for the treasure.
Seeking communion with nature and life’s bounty. Wealth derived
from changing perspective. Talent and beauty. Fantasies. Illusions
vs. reality. Fairylands.
The Caution: Seeking easy, tempting solutions. Thinking that
rewards are always just “over the horizon”. Thinking that one is
never going to get near “it”. Elusive success. Forgetting the more
immediate things in life. Seeking perfection. Castles in the air.
Pipe dreams. Fool's paradise.
Taurus 4
IfItraveledtotheendofthe
rainbow,AsDameFortunedid
intend,Murphywouldbethereto
tellme,Thepot’sattheotherend.
BertWhitney
All that is gold does not glitter;
not all those that wander are
lost.
J.R.R.Tolkien
Pennies do not come from
heaven—they have to be
earned here on earth.
MargaretThatcher
The foolish man seeks
happiness in the distance,the
wise grows it under his feet.
J.Robert Oppenheimer
He felt like a man who,chasing
rainbows,has had one of them
suddenly turn and bite him in
the leg.
P.G.Wodehouse
I have been in Sorrow’s kitchen
and licked out all the pots.
Then I have stood on the peaky
mountain wrapped in rainbows,
with a harp and sword in my
hands.
Zora Neale Hurston
A golden key will open every
lock.
Yiddish Proverb
Every absurdity has a champion
to defend it.
Oliver Goldsmith

<<<PAGE 58>>>
TAURUS
R
35
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Taurus 5
The bitterest tears shed over
graves are for words left
unsaid and deeds left undone.
Christopher Crowfield
One problem with gazing too
frequently into the past is that
we may turn around to find
the future has run out on us.
Michael Cibenko
If you’re still hanging onto a
dead dream of yesterday,laying
flowers on its grave by the
hour,you cannot be planting
the seeds for a dream to grow
today.
Joyce Chapman
Make the most of your regrets;
never smother your sorrow,but
tend and cherish it till it comes
to have a separate and integral
interest.To regret deeply is to
live afresh.
Henry DavidThoreau
Every time I think that I’m
getting old,and going to the
grave,something else happens.
Lillian Carter
The pain passes,but the beauty
remains.
Pierre Auguste Renoir
The grave is but the threshold of
eternity.
Robert Southey
AYOUTHFULWIDOW,FRESH AND
SOUL-CLEANSED FROM GRIEF,
KNEELS AT AN OPEN GRAVETO
RECEIVETHE SECRET OF ETERNAL LIFE
Commentary: ‘A Youthful Widow, Fresh and Soul-Cleansed From
Grief, Kneels at an Open Grave to Receive the Secret of Eternal
Life’. She’s learning some hard-won and valuable lessons through
her loss. She is mourning at a grave and receiving meaningful
insights into the purpose of life. However, the ‘Grave’ is still
‘Open’, which shows that in some respect she hasn’t had the
necessary time or hasn’t been able to complete the mourning
process and move on with her life. The ‘Grave’ will only be filled
in when she can sincerely say good-bye to the person or situation
that has been lost. By continuing to stand at the ‘Open Grave’ the
“burial ritual” cannot be fully accomplished or completed.
Oracle: Looking at things that are gone or lost can stop people
from accepting newer, more vital relationships and opportunities.
Don’t let loss make you give up and throw everything away.
Gathering up one’s energy and starting on a new path is often the
key. Realizing that life must go on, we learn that we can recover
our feet and move forward. However, it is very important to allow
time to grieve. Letting go of the past, and things that are worn
out, and being accepting will bring release. The memory of the
person, thing or situation that has passed from your life can bring
tears of ‘Grief’, but also tears of joy. Remember the gifts that have
been given or left to you, and don’t focus on the losses that you
can’t replace. How many times and for how long do you have to
say good-bye to someone or something? Don’t stand still, staring
at loss, immobilized by fear. Imagine yourself walking away to
a new chapter of your life. Take note of when it is time to fill in
the ‘Grave’ and complete the circle. Fill in ‘The Grave’, bless the
past and move on.
Keywords: Gradual realization of the illusion of matter. Letting
go of that which no longer works. Purging and burning the past.
Giving up past grievances. The passage of grief. Receiving the gifts
that loss and separation can bring through time. Grief, divorce,
loss. Redundancies. Near-death experiences. Inheritances.
TheCaution: Wasting time staring at lost opportunities. Grudges
and bad feelings that last much longer than needed. Staring at
issues of loss and death. War and its horrors. The feeling that one
has no future. People or events that just won’t leave one’s memory.
Hanging on for fear of the future. Empty legacies.

<<<PAGE 59>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
36
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BRIDGE BEING BUILT ACROSS A
HIGH NARROW GORGE
Commentary: ‘A Bridge Being Built Across a High Narrow
Gorge’ is about finding a creative and concrete solution to
be able to cross to the other side of a separation or dilemma.
There may be a separation or gulf, shown here by the ‘Gorge’,
between places, people or objectives. ‘Bridges’ need to be built
to overcome separate areas of activity and to link people and
places together.
Oracle: There may seem to be no way of overcoming the distance
between you and another, or the outcome or thing that’s desired.
Realizing the gulfs you face and doing something about any
breaks in communications between you can lead to whole new
possibilities. Building ‘A Bridge’ takes time, energy and most
often, the help of others. It may be best to start working towards
‘Building a Bridge’ now. Once it is completed, the dangers that
the ‘Bridge’ spans are no longer of such great concern – that is,
unless the ‘Bridge’ is not secure. Failure to adequately span the
gap may actually feel life threatening. Looking back or down
may bring on a sense of danger or instability. However, with this
Symbol, you can feel secure that the ‘Bridge’ will be there for
you when you need it. Imagine yourself coming to the brink and
going straight ahead, but don’t look down. With creative thought
physical limitations can be overcome most of the time. Be careful
not to get preoccupied or wound up worrying whether things
are going to fail. Remember the saying, “Don’t cross that bridge
until you come to it.” This basically indicates that you shouldn’t
concern yourself with difficulties until they arise. Don’t place
too much importance on the outcomes until you get to the other
side. It may help to get some plans drawn up, in reality or in your
imagination.
Keywords: Overcoming distance and separation. Endeavoring
to build continuity. Solving problems with creative solutions.
Bridging emotional chasms. Spanning gaps. Breaking down
barriers. Structures spanning distances between places or
people. Conquering time and space barriers. Physical limitations
overcome. Taking one step at a time. Avoiding looking down.
The Caution: Taking the long way round to avoid asking for
help. Using shortcuts to cut across the real issue. Only seeing
the risks, not the solutions to problems. The fear of establishing
connections. The pervading sense that it could all fall through
at any moment. Extreme sports.
Taurus 6
Faith is building on what you
know is here,so you can reach
what you know is there.
Cullen Hightower
Don’t be afraid to take a big
step when one is indicated.You
can’t cross a chasm in two small
steps.
David Lloyd George
Being on the tightrope is living;
everything else is waiting.
KarlWallenda
We are told never to cross a
bridge till we come to it,but this
world is owned by men who
have“crossed bridges”in their
imagination far ahead of the
crowd.
Speakers Library
People are lonely because they
build walls instead of bridges.
J.F.Newton
The hardest thing in life to learn
is which bridge to cross and
which to burn.
David Russell
Voyager,there are no bridges;
one builds them as one walks.
Gloria Evangelina Anzaldua
Creativity is the power to
connect the seemingly
unconnected.
William Plomer

<<<PAGE 60>>>
TAURUS
R
37
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA COMES
TO DRAW WATER FROM JACOB’S
WELL
Commentary: ‘The Woman of Samaria Comes to Draw Water
from Jacob’s Well’ is a Symbol that comes from the Biblical story
of Jesus meeting ‘The Woman of Samaria’ at ‘Jacob’s well’. She,
along with others, was taken by surprise that Jesus would actually
speak to her, for she was a Samaritan and he was a Jew. The Jews
and the Samaritans normally did not get along. She was also on
the fringe of her own society as she was not married. As he spoke
to ‘The Woman’, he revealed to her that he was the Messiah. This
was a great blessing to her. The Buddhist tradition tells a very
similar story of being accepted regardless of caste.
Oracle: This Symbol calls for universal love to be available to
everyone. It speaks of the need to dispel prejudice, either given
or received. With this Symbol, there can be the urge to seek and
to find acceptance, love and redemption. If one’s elders have
passed down prejudices, be aware that they lived in a different
time; living in the present may require the updating of ideas and
opinions. If your heart is clogged up with old emotions or spent
feelings, it is time to clear these. In doing so, address situations
that hold people apart. Take action to restore any lost self-respect.
Own up, express your concerns to that stranger within yourself,
your shadow, and then let them go. It may be that someone else
needs your help. If so, draw on your inner resources and take time
out to assist them. No matter your situation, you will be blessed
by “higher powers” if you give others respect and reverence.
It is about discovering what you share with others, not what
separates you. Similarities lie deep within us all. Imagine yourself
drawing ‘Water’ up from that special ‘Well’, then find yourself
refreshed and ready for a more rewarding, compassionate and
confident life.
Keywords: Dipping into family ancestry. Past lives. New ideas
being revealed about one’s social and spiritual integrity. Going
below the surface. Assimilation of divergent ideals. Feeling
blessed. Life-altering experiences. The blessing of water. Freedom
and respect for all. Stepping over social boundaries.
The Caution: Allowing social prejudice to rule decisions about
oneself and others. Unacceptable behavior based on social
conditioning. Feeling that one is from the “wrong tribe” and
can't assimilate or contribute. Issues of being acceptable, worthy
or a “local”. Water disputes.
Taurus 7
“Is this one tribe or a stranger?”
is the calculation of the narrow-
minded;but to those of a noble
disposition the world itself is
but one family.
Hitopadesa Proverb
We never know the worth of
water till the well is dry.
English Proverb
Your vision will become clear
only when you can look into
your own heart ...Who looks
outside,dreams;who looks
inside awakes.
Carl Gustav Jung
It was ...enough to suffer as a
woman,an individual,on one’s
own account,without having to
suffer for the race as well.It was
brutality,and undeserved.
Nella Larsen
We need to feel the cheer and
inspiration of meeting each
other;we need to gain the
courage and fresh life that
comes from the mingling
of congenial souls,of those
working for the same ends.
Josephine St.Pierre Ruffin
What I am is a humanist before
anything… before I’m a Jew,
before I’m black,before I’m a
woman.And my beliefs are for
the human race—they don’t
exclude anyone.
Whoopi Goldberg

<<<PAGE 61>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
38
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SLEIGH WITHOUT SNOW
Commentary: ‘A Sleigh Without Snow’ is a Symbol of something
that has difficulty finding the means to get to its destination. A
‘Sleigh’ can’t go anywhere without ‘Snow’, as it is the medium
which supports the ‘Sleigh’ in its movement, and without it the
‘Sleigh’ isn’t going anywhere. The 'Sleigh' may be useful at other
times, but now it is either ahead of its time or useless, redundant,
or waiting for the right moment.
Oracle: It may seem that there isn’t much that can be done with
the fuel that is readily available. Regardless of the amount of
desire or the need for progress or forward push, this ‘Sleigh’
without ‘Snow’ will not be going anywhere in a big hurry. This can
symbolize a situation where someone is ahead of their time, but it
can also show that someone has missed their time to go forward
and they have to wait for future opportunities to show themselves.
They may also have to wait for a healing, or for financial situations
to resolve. Regardless of which is true, there is a sense here of
having to wait until conditions and situations change to be able
to achieve what it is that you want or to get where you want to
go. Are you using up a lot of energy trying to make things work
in very difficult conditions? You may have part of the problem
solved (you at least have a vehicle for moving forward), but now
you must have the patience to wait for the rest of the elements to
fall into place. This Symbol is often about timing. You can often
fuel your situation by really tapping into your imagination. The
question is, what adjustments or improvisations can be made?
You need to wait until the time is right, then you will have exactly
what you need – the “fuel” and the right conditions which allow
you to complete your mission.
Keywords: Independence from outer circumstances. Using the
creative mind to work through momentary shortages or problems.
Anticipating future conditions. Having the “vehicle”, but not the
time, energy or the “fuel”. Improvising things so that they work
better or ahead of their time. Gas, oil, fuel. Snow. The value of
timing. Lack of resources. "Tyres" that are missing or don't work.
Being ahead or behind one's time.
The Caution: Forcing your ideas or feelings even though the
time is not right. Lack of support from the environment. Missing
connections. Running out of energy. Having the right thing in
the wrong place. Ideas without the capital to make them reality.
A lack of impetus or propulsion. Feeling stuck, unmoving. Traffic
jams. Empty tanks.
Taurus 8
I don’t have any solution but I
certainly admire the problem.
Ashleigh Brilliant
Not only is there no God,but try
finding a plumber on Sunday.
Woody Allen
The poverty of our imagination
is no measure of,say,the world’s
resources.Our posterity will no
doubt get fuel in ways that we
are unable to devise for them.
George Eliot
A creative economy is the fuel
of magnificence.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Confront the dark parts of
yourself,and work to banish
them with illumination and
forgiveness.Your willingness to
wrestle with your demons will
cause your angels to sing.Use
the pain as fuel,as a reminder
of your strength.
AugustWilson
No steam or gas ever drives
anything until it is confined.No
Niagara is ever turned into light
and power until it is tunneled.
No life ever grows until it is
focused,dedicated,disciplined.
Harry Emerson Fosdick
Nothing is so difficult that
diligence cannot master it.
Malagasy Proverb

<<<PAGE 62>>>
TAURUS
R
39
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHRISTMAS TREE IS DECORATED
AND SHINES IN THE DARKNESS
Commentary: ‘A Christmas Tree is Decorated’ is a Symbol that
brings feelings of family, celebration and happiness. When the ‘Tree
is Decorated’ it represents a sign of unity and that many of our
family and celebrational needs are, or will be, met. The star placed
on top of the ‘Tree’ represents the star that led the wise men, the
Magi astrologers, to the stable in Bethlehem where Jesus was born.
As long as the spirit of Christmas is celebrated with thankfulness
and joy, people will be happy and share both their love and their
time. Often at Christmas it is cold outside. There is the sensation
of snow on the ground and everything being rather bleak outside
whilst inside there is love, shelter, food and warmth. There is also
thebeautyoftheChristmaslights–the‘TreeisDecoratedandShines
in the Darkness’. The presents glint and a feeling of anticipation
hangs in the air of what fun and rewards are yet to come. Giving and
receiving whilst enjoying family and friends are the main elements
behind the spirit of Christmas. The presents don’t have to be big and
expensive, it’s the warmth and spirit of sharing that matters.
Oracle: This is an opportunity for enjoying or accepting family, for
celebrations and appreciating cultural ties, and for taking time out
to remember and honor these things. Activities with the group will
bring joy to all those who are close enough to partake. Even if you
don’t know the people you are celebrating with, joy will be spread
and celebrated—unless there are feelings of alienation, loneliness
or loss. Do some elements of your situation shine more brightly in
the cloak of the night than the clear light of day? If there are gifts
you want to give, are you worried about how they will be received?
Even if you arrive empty handed, the true gift is in the giving of
yourself, not in the actual gift itself. Hopefully everybody realizes
this. One of our presents to others is to be able to receive our gifts
and each other joyfully without worry or judgment.
Keywords: Enjoying the fruits of one’s culture. Warmth within
whilst it may be cold outside. The rebirth of the spirit. Faith and
the hope of happiness and goodwill of people to one another.
Celebrations bringing people together that once were parted.
Decorations. Things done with loving intent. The promise of good
things. Colored lights. Gifts. Stars and angels.
TheCaution: The pretense of happiness or success in a decorative
show. Not allowing for others from different religions or social
classes. Being excluded and left in the cold. Family cohesion
on display belying the real situation. Commercialism. Family
disappointments.
Taurus 9
Remember,if Christmas isn’t
found in your heart,you won’t
find it under the tree.
Charlotte Carpenter
I bought my brother some
gift-wrap for Christmas.I took
it to the gift wrap department
and told them to wrap it,
but in a different print so he
would know when to stop
unwrapping.
StevenWright
Rings and jewels are not gifts,
but apologies for gifts,for the
only [true] gift is a portion of
thyself.
RalphWaldo Emerson
And every gift,though it be
small,is in reality great if given
with affection.
Pindar
A good conscience is a
continual Christmas.
Benjamin Franklin
Adults who [hang] gifts of a
ready-made education on
the Christmas tree of a child
waiting outside the door to life
do not realize how unreceptive
they are making the children to
everything that constitutes the
true surprise of life.
Karl Kraus

<<<PAGE 63>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
40
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A RED CROSS NURSE WITH WARM
SYMPATHY
Commentary: ‘A Red Cross Nurse’ is someone who can be called
upon to help in an emergency. She is receptive to the emotional
and physical needs of others. Reliable and caring, she brings
healing and relief as she patches up what needs to be fixed.
Making things better is her quest and her duty. Mostly, she carries
out her duties without fuss or fanfare. That she does this ‘With
Warm Sympathy’ implies that the ‘Red Cross Nurse’ is a kindly
person, someone who can be relied upon for doing the right thing
with care, attention to detail and the intention of healing. She
needs to be attentive every time she is called upon, regardless of
whether she is tired or has chores of her own to attend to.
Oracle: It seems that there is a lot you have to do, but first you
will probably have to provide help to others. There can be
a great deal of inner healing achieved when helping others.
Through empathy and sympathy we often learn about aspects
of ourselves. How willing and able are you to give your time to
help another, either physically or emotionally? How can you be
expected to cope if you have too much to do? Perhaps you are in
need of some help yourself. Things may not be easy or enjoyable
and you may have to cross over into the “dark side” in order to
bring light and love to the situation. Things may call for a more
personal touch and approaching matters sympathetically rather
than just clinically may be appropriate. Look at what’s occurring,
and take into consideration people’s shortcomings. Sometimes
others need care because they can’t cope with even the smallest
things. There may not be many apparent rewards but the sense of
care and healing that is invoked is often its own reward. Through
showing ‘Warm Sympathy’ to those involved, a solution and a
healing can be attained.
Keywords: Unconditional and compassionate understanding
and caring. Breaking down the borders between self and others.
Always having to find reserves of energy. Looking after people’s
physical, emotional, spiritual welfare. Giving and also receiving.
Volunteer work. First aid kits. Bedside manners. Having a mission
to fulfill. Having a shoulder to cry on.
The Caution: ‘Fussing’ around and doing more than one needs
to. Always butting in, even when it’s not necessary or wanted.
Being a doormat and doing more than your share. Not caring
how others are coping, even when it’s really necessary. Being
officious and bossy. Feeling used.
Taurus 10
If you treat a sick child like an
adult and a sick adult like a
child,everything usually works
out pretty well.
Black Hawk
I may be compelled to face
danger,but never fear it,and
while our soldiers can stand
and fight,I can stand and feed
and nurse them.
Clara Barton
Complain to one who can help
you.
Yugoslav Proverb
When you are in trouble,
people who call to sympathize
are really looking for the
particulars.
Ed Howe
The comforter’s head never
aches.
Proverb
A broken bone can heal,but
the wound a word opens can
fester forever.
JessamynWest
God appoints our graces
to be nurses to other men’s
weaknesses.
HenryWard Beecher
If you want others to be happy,
practice compassion.If you
want to be happy practice
compassion.
H.H.The Dalai Lama

<<<PAGE 64>>>
TAURUS
R
41
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN SPRINKLING LONG ROWS
OF FLOWERS
Commentary: ‘A Woman Sprinkling Long Rows of Flowers’ is a
lovely picture of the rewards that come from tending a garden and
being responsive to its needs. This takes perseverance and can
be hard work as there are weeds or other unwanted elements to
keep an eye out for. However, tending to the ‘Flowers’ gives the
‘Woman’ time to pause for a moment and breathe in the beauty
of nature and her place in it. She can relax into nature and enjoy
the moment as a lot of the hard work is finished; her garden has
now come into bloom.
Oracle: This Symbol often speaks of the need to take time to
nurture the physical self. Along with smaller, less able things that
need care, your body needs water, sustenance and nourishment,
too. Drinking plenty of water and nourishing yourself with good
food is part of this. Hence there may be the need to pay attention
to what your body is telling you. Sometimes the mind needs to
take a rest, and the body needs to be allowed to come to bloom
and bask a little in the sunlight. Now is the time to enjoy the fruits
of one’s work. Also, looking after younger and smaller things so
they may grow to maturity and fullness brings its own type of
reward. This might require patience and a determination to work
at something. Keeping an eye on things that you are responsible
for will ensure that they don’t dry out and fade away ahead of,
or before, their time. Weeding out undesirable factors is often a
necessary part of this process. Taking time out to actually water
plants or the garden may bring some wonderful realizations to
your life. As fairies and nature spirits are said to live in gardens,
meditating whilst ‘Sprinkling’ the garden, or pot plants, may
bring nourishing insights to the question that brought you to
the Oracle.
Keywords: Having patience and care. Nurturing and fertilizing
creativity. External evidence of internal beauty. Looking after
small details to reap treasures later. The Tree of Life. Stopping
to smell the roses. Paying attention to detail. Flower essences.
Sprinkling love and sustenance. Watering and fertilizing. Tending
the soil. Care and love.
The Caution: Giving superficial attention just to keep up
appearances. Neglect of things once they’re established. Giving
up on projects half way through. Dehydration and neglect.
Droughts or energy, love or feeling. Neglecting things in favor
of other priorities. Water restictions.
Taurus 11
Cultivate more joy by arranging
your life so that more joy will be
likely.
GeorgeWitkin
Flowers always make people
better,happier and more
helpful;they are sunshine,food
and medicine to the soul.
Luther Burbank
Would that the little flowers
were born to live conscious of
half the pleasure which they
give.
Longfellow
Cultivate peace first in the
garden of your heart by
removing the weeds of lust,
hatred,greed,selfishness,and
jealousy.Then only those who
come in contact with you will
be benefited by your vibrations
of peace and harmony.
Sivananda
By cultivating the beautiful we
scatter the seeds of heavenly
flowers,as by doing good we
cultivate those that belong to
humanity.
Vernon Howard
For the benefit of the flowers,
we water the thorns,too.
Egyptian Proverb
Some of the sweetest berries
grow among the sharpest
thorns.
Gaelic Proverb

<<<PAGE 65>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
42
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A YOUNG COUPLE WALK DOWN
MAIN-STREET,WINDOW-SHOPPING
Commentary: ‘A Young Couple’ are walking down the ‘Main-
Street, Window-Shopping’. They may be looking with hopes for
the future, or perhaps they are just seeking to while away the
time together. Regardless, they are an image of youth and the
expectations of bigger and better things. If this ‘Young Couple’
have goals in common and a common path to share, all will be
well and things will unfold naturally. It may be that in light of
their social position or their financial possibilities, they can only
‘Window-Shop’ for the moment. Is this ‘Couple’ really ‘Window-
Shopping’ together, or is only one of them dreaming of what they
could have and how things could be better? Are they “together”
or do they really want different things out of life?
Oracle: Things are probably out of reach for you at the moment,
including the stability of your domestic or emotional needs,
but that shouldn’t stop you looking or planning for the future.
However, care may need to be taken, as jealousy and greed can
rise up easily when there seems to be so much, so close and yet so
far away. Enjoy the display and the quiet moments of togetherness
without rush, and then get back to your real life. Realize that even
though things feel far off in some way, things of inner worth
are available to you, right now. Is there an issue concerning
commitment to relationship, or is this a situation of just having a
look to see what might be possible for the future? Now is possibly
not the right time to make any firm decisions, but rather to look
at all your possibilities and options. ‘Window-Shop’ a little and
share your dreams. See how they can turn into reality.
Keywords: The longing for “things”. The allure of ownership.
Consumerism. Trying to raise money. Worrying about the “cost”
of things. Weddings and engagements. Credit cards. Finances
that are shared. Shared dreams. The future and its possibilities.
Young people. Planning. Shopping. The honeymoon period. So
much so close and yet so far.
The Caution: Denying happiness because of material deficiency.
“Keeping up with the Jones”. Not focusing on your partner/
friend. Unsure of where one stands. Being unwilling to commit
to anything just yet. Avoiding the heart of one’s relationship.
Focusing on the financial side. Issues of ‘who pays for what’.
Arguments over money or possessions. Merely ‘Window
Shopping’ not committing. Overspending. Being in debt.
Monetary distractions. Missed opportunities.
Taurus 12
Joy is not in things,it is in us.
RichardWagner
You can’t have everything.
Where would you put it?
StephenWright
Large desire is endless poverty.
Indian Proverb
We don’t need to increase
our goods nearly as much as
scaling down our wants.Not
wanting some thing is as good
as possessing it.
Donald Horban
Advertising may be described
as the science of arresting
human intelligence long
enough to get money from it.
Stephen Leacock
What really matters is what you
do with what you have.
Shirly Lord
When we are not rich enough to
be able to purchase happiness,
we must not approach too near
and gaze on it in shop windows.
Tristan Bernard
Marrying a man is like buying
something you’ve been
admiring for a long time in a
shop window.You may love
it when you get it home,but
it doesn’t always go with
everything else in the house.
Jean Kerr

<<<PAGE 66>>>
TAURUS
R
43
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PORTER CARRYING A MOUNTAIN
OF HEAVY BAGGAGE
Commentary: A ‘Porter’, otherwise known as a baggage handler
or bellboy, has a lot of work to do. He is performing a service
for others and here he is seen having ‘a Mountain of Heavy
Baggage’ to move or ‘Carry’. He needs to remain cheerful and
not reveal how much this ‘Mountainous’ load is weighing him
down; otherwise he may not get the approval of those he is
'Carrying' the load for. There would be no thanks and no “tips”
if he were to complain, groan or grumble. ‘Porters’ do a lot of
hard work but don’t often get much appreciation or attention.
They are expected to just get on with the job, sometimes they
become almost invisible. This Symbol can also be an expression
of class-consciousness.
Oracle: There may be a load or a heavy burden to bear. It may be
your own burdens or could indeed be other people’s. Be careful
that you are not doing too much for others as you may be carrying
their burdens for them. You could end up just helping people to
hang on to their extra ‘Baggage’ through your desire to help out,
be useful and share the load. This can be a problem, weighing
them down when you are not available, and of course it can also
weigh you down emotionally, as well as physically. It may be
that others are expecting you to shoulder their responsibilities.
Having so much to ‘Carry’ can lead to bad posture, bad backs
or a distorted infrastructure. Are you going from one burdening
experience to another? For some people, to have the service of a
‘Porter’ can be a pleasant and well-earned respite from their daily
struggles. For others, there can be the expectation that someone
else will always shoulder the load. That may be okay in a hotel or
a train station, but how appropriate is it in everyday life? Don’t
let yourself be used to carry other people’s “stuff”.
Keywords: Self-reliance. Owning other people’s ‘garbage’.
Shouldering baggage or weight. Being weighed-down. Feeling
responsible for everything. Bad backs and posture. Carrying
others. Counseling people, taking on their emotions. Bad backs,
shoulders, knees, etc. Strain and wear. Bearing the family guilt.
Luggage. Trolleys. Looking for tips.
The Caution: Being busy with other peoples’ problems.
Unable to work for your own benefit. Carrying other peoples’
responsibilities. Being indispensable until the energy is all worn
out. Not knowing when to say “no” to other’s demands. The
burden of debts. Being useful but unimportant.
Taurus 13
Everyone thinks his own burden
heavy.
French Proverb
The burden which is well borne
becomes light.
Ovid
Do not free the camel of the
burden of his hump;you may
be freeing him from being a
camel.
Gilbert K.Chesterton
No one is useless in this world
who lightens the burden of it to
anyone else.
Charles Dickens
Your body is the baggage you
must carry through life.The
more excess baggage,the
shorter the trip.
Arnold Glasow
RESPONSIBILITY,n.A
detachable burden easily
shifted to the shoulders of God,
Fate,Fortune,Luck or one’s
neighbor.
Ambrose Bierce
Almost everybody walks
around with a vast burden of
imaginary limitations inside his
head.While the burden remains,
personal success is as difficult
to achieve as the conquest of
Everest with a sack of rocks tied
to your back.
J.H.Brennan

<<<PAGE 67>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
44
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Taurus 14
In every out thrust headland,in
every curving beach,in every
grain of sand there is a story of
the earth.
Rachel Carson
I seem to have been only like
a boy playing on the seashore,
and diverting myself in now
and then finding a smoother
pebble or a prettier shell than
ordinary,whilst the great ocean
of truth lay all undiscovered
before me.
Isaac Newton
One cannot collect all the
beautiful shells on the beach.
One can collect only a few,and
they are more beautiful if they
are few.
Anne Morrow Lindbergh
To live and let live,without
clamor for distinction or
recognition ...to write truth
first on the tablet of one’s own
heart – this is the sanity and
perfection of living,and my
human ideal.
Mary Baker Eddy
Sit in reverie and watch the
changing color of the waves
that break upon the idle
seashore of the mind .
HenryWadsworth Longfellow
ON THE BEACH,CHILDREN PLAY
WHILE SHELLFISH GROPE AT THE
EDGE OF THE WATER
Commentary: ‘On the Beach, Children Play While Shellfish Grope
at the Edge of the Water’ speaks of peaceful coexistence amongst
beings on different levels of evolution. The ‘Children are Playing’
whilst the ‘Shellfish’ are feeding. Each is getting on with what
they are doing in peaceful harmony. It shows the essential unity
of all life, no matter how “evolved” each being is. Getting back
to the basic elements, such as nature, with a sense of ‘Play’ will
help alleviate the seriousness of any problems or stress.
Oracle: Allow your instincts to guide you in the process facing
you. Get on with your own activities, focus on these and enjoy
them, regardless of what others are doing. Looking outside of
your own sphere of operations may bring harm to others, as can
happen when ‘Children’ on the ‘Beach’ take ‘Shellfish’ and put
them in buckets. The day and the experience will come to an end
with the tide bringing another day and another episode in your
life. Sometimes you can feel confident and settled with how your
desires are being manifested in the world, while at other times you
may feel out of your depth with the expectations that the world
seems to have of you. In truth, you will find that most situations
will be a combination of both. Just be yourself, lighten up and
relax. The message is to enjoy those things that make sense and
just allow time to teach you how to deal with those things you
don’t understand. Try indulging in some time out by the water
and interact with nature. An insight into your problem is likely
to be revealed with the coming and going of the tide.
Keywords: Being self-sufficient. Looking after one’s own affairs.
A sense of at-one-ment with all forms of life. Having a live and let
live attitude. Peripheral vision. Returning to the source. Feeling
safe in a natural environment. Playing alongside nature. Building
sand castles. Playing in pools or baths. Buckets and spades. Sun
protection. Interacting without really interacting. Swimming.
Sand, wind and sea. Rockpools. Shellfish, oysters, shrimp.
TheCaution: Meddling in people’s lives. Restriction of play. Being
distracted. Sandcastles that will eventually get washed away. Not
knowing how to loosen up with others and relax into a natural
environment. Fussing that people aren't doing the 'right thing'.
Sunburn and exposure to weather. Voyeurism.

<<<PAGE 68>>>
TAURUS
R
45
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN WITH A SILK HAT,MUFFLED
AGAINST THE COLD,BRAVES A
STORM
Commentary: ‘A Man’ in this Symbol is shown ‘Muffled Against
the Storm’. He is experiencing a time of hardship and discomfort,
and is unable to avoid the difficulties that have arisen. He ‘Braves
a Storm’, yet he is wearing his ‘Silk Hat’. The ‘Silk Hat’ indicates
that he may be somewhat of an expensive and stylish dresser.
The fact that he’s wearing it shows a somewhat ‘Brave’, dignified
and optimistic attitude of confidence and hope for the future.
However, people often don’t take other's difficulties seriously if
they put on a brave and dignified attitude, dressing properly and
presenting things as if they were really okay.
Oracle: Someone may not be admitting to what’s really going
on or acting as if everything is just fine. There is a need to show
determination, confidence and hope for the future, as this will
encourage you and those around you. There may not be much
that can really be done; it’s just a difficult, ‘Stormy’ time. It’s the
nature of life for things to turn around and improve. Forge ahead
knowing that life will calm down and get easier. It is important to
know whether the ‘Storm’ is visible to everyone and not merely in
someone’s mind. The bad weather you perceive could be hidden
from others. Presenting a brave face to all you meet and hoping
for a better future often helps. However, it could lead to you not
being taken seriously by others. ‘Brave the Storm’ and eventually
you will you be able to relax both your mind and body. Then
you will be able to, once again, show your individual style and
be appreciated.
Keywords: Inner poise being more important than outer
appearances. Braving stormy weather. Ploughing on through
difficulties. Being willing to weather storms and take on the
hard times. Having tasks or errands to perform when one
would rather not. Hats, scarves and muffles. Sudden change of
circumstances.
The Caution: Not showing your true feelings. Superficial shows
of strength. Not noticing things improving. Always battling the
“elements”. Complaining and whining instead of getting on with
the task at hand. Wanting to be pampered and not face up to life’s
storms. Considering appearance before all else. Superficiality.
Insufficient or inappropriate clothing or apparel. Refusing to
protect one's self from cold or harm.
Taurus 15
The measure of a man is the way
he bears up under misfortune.
Plutarch
The sum of the whole is this:
walk and be happy,walk and
be healthy.The best way to
lengthen out our days is to walk
steadily and with a purpose.
Charles Dickens
There is many a good man to
be found under a shabby hat.
Chinese Proverb
And all your future lies beneath
your hat.
John Oldham
Keeping your clothes well
pressed will keep you from
looking hard-pressed.
Coleman Cox
It is easy enough to be pleasant
when life blows by like a song.
But the man worthwhile is
the one who will smile when
everything goes dead wrong.
EllaWheelerWilcox
Patience serves as a protection
against wrongs as clothes do
against cold.For if you put
on more clothes as the cold
increases,it will have no power
to hurt you.
Leonardo daVinci
Never run after your own hat.
Others will be delighted to do it.
Why spoil their fun?.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 69>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
46
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD MAN IS ATTEMPTING,WITH A
DEGREE OF SUCCESS UNSUSPECTED
BY HIM,TO REVEALTHE MYSTERIES
TO A MOTLEY GROUP
Commentary: The ‘Old Man’ is someone who understands many
things. He is ‘Attempting to Reveal the Mysteries to a Group’ that
don’t seem to understand, or at least they aren’t readily showing
that they do. This is ‘A Motley Group’, which means it is made up
of people who may be different from each other in appearance,
background, interests, etc. However, he is succeeding in teaching
them as he’s accomplishing a ‘Degree of Success Unsuspected by
Him’. It is likely that the ‘Old Man’, or the teacher, is the one who
misunderstands what’s going on with the ‘Group’, or his students.
He may see the superficial differences in the ‘Group’ as a barrier
to their ability to understand his message. It is more likely that
they are actually quite focused, but each in their own distinct
or unique way. By imparting his knowledge, ‘The Mysteries’, the
‘Old Man’ has unified the ‘Motley Group’.
Oracle: It may seem that nobody is paying attention to the advice
or wisdom that is being offered, but it is not the wisdom that is at
fault. There may certainly be a need to alter the way information
is delivered to make it more easily understood, however it is
also important not to underestimate the capacity of the listeners
to comprehend the messages that are being imparted. Take
confidence in the knowledge being given, or received, and
have less expectation of how people should behave, respond or
look. Remember that “conventional wisdom” does not always
overcome the human emotional issues of confidence and self
esteem. Be confident that the message is valuable enough to hold
the attention of those participating.
Keywords: The need to try a new approach. Challenging the
status quo. Astrodrama. Being way ahead of one’s time. Getting
one’s message across in an innovative and creative way. A
teacher uniting diverse people in a common cause. Generation
gaps. Wisdom given with expectation. Ideas bringing people
together.
The Caution: Exaggerated opinion of one’s understanding of
the situation. The mistaken belief that others need to know
something. Not being in touch with the “times”. Feeling outdated.
Preaching old, possibly outworn ideas. Insecure feelings based
on conservative expectations of others.
Taurus 16
A teacher affects eternity;
he can never tell where his
influence stops.
Henry Brooks Adams
Think like a wise man but
communicate in the language
of the people.
William ButlerYeats
The more abstract the truth
you want to teach,the more
thoroughly you must seduce
the senses to accept it.
Friedrich Nietzsche
I have learnt silence from the
talkative,toleration from the
intolerant,and kindness from
the unkind;yet strange,I am
ungrateful to these teachers.
Khalil Gibran
When I was fourteen years
old,I was amazed at how
unintelligent my father was.By
the time I turned twenty-one,I
was astounded how much he
had learned in the last seven
years.
MarkTwain
You cannot teach a man
anything;you can only help
him to find it within himself.
Galileo
The man with a new idea is a
crank until the idea succeeds.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 70>>>
TAURUS
R
47
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SYMBOLICAL BATTLE BETWEEN
‘SWORDS’THE DISCIPLES OF MIGHT,
AND‘TORCHES’,THE DISCIPLES OF
ENLIGHTENMENT
Commentary: ‘A Symbolical Battle’ is pictured here, between
the ‘Swords and Torches’. The ‘Swords’ are pictured to be
‘The Disciples of Might’ and the ‘Torches’ ‘The Disciples of
Enlightenment’. The ‘Swords’ show weapons and strong-arm
tactics, whereas the ‘Torches’ are instruments that bring truth
and light. Arguments over ideals can easily lead to 'Battles' and
war. This suggests a split between using power and strength and
using reason and intelligence.
Oracle: There is a struggle between practical needs and the
underlying reasons for having those needs. It can be that someone
has become so caught up in “what” they are trying to achieve
that they have probably lost sight of “why”. The endeavor to
bring ‘Enlightenment’ to people often meets with resistance,
particularly when this ‘Enlightenment’ will disrupt the usual
process of things. One can see this in places where the media
has a stranglehold on information. In some instances it is for
political agendas and in others it is for commercial reasons, but the
effect is the same: to achieve or to maintain a particular agenda
by persuasive force. ‘Battles’ are only truly worth fighting when
the ideals behind them are clearly believed in or understood.
To do this it is often important to pause and reassess why you
are doing what you are doing. If fighting becomes a habit and
loses its purpose, the spirit can become confused and therefore
weakened. Any confusion inside you is an indicator that the
power of the outer world needs to be reconsidered. How can
things be transformed and brought into the light of acceptance
and understanding so that the ‘Sword’ can be dropped and peace
reign?
Keywords: The battle of “might versus light”. The Spear of
Destiny. Spiritual differences. Arguments. The story of Hitler.
The Inquisition. The Crusades. Bringing love and light to war
zones. The pen being mightier than the sword. Peace marches,
Candles, torches. Weapons. The might of the media.
The Caution: Controlling those around with rational or brute
force rather than with inner enlightenment or knowledge. People
arguing over ideals. Forcing opinions on each other. Religious
conflicts. War rallies. Propaganda.
Taurus 17
Let us have faith that right
makes might.
Abraham Lincoln
A blow with a word strikes
deeper than a blow with a
sword.
Robert Burton
People who fight fire with fire
usually end up with ashes.
AbigailVan Buren
Wisdom is always an
overmatch for strength.
Phaedrus
Imagination is the one weapon
in the war against reality.
Jules de Gaultier
Constantly choosing the lesser
of two evils is still choosing evil.
Jerry Garcia
Truth is a torch that shines
through the fog without
dispelling it.
Claude A.Helvétius
Bring on your tear gas;bring
on your grenades,your new
supplies of Mace,your state
troopers and even your
national guards.But let the
record show we ain’t going to
be turned around.
Ralph Abernathy
War is hell.
GeneralWilliam Sherman

<<<PAGE 71>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
48
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN AIRING AN OLD BAG
THROUGH A SUNNY WINDOW TO
GIVE IT AIR AND SUNSHINE
Commentary: The ‘Woman’ pictured here is ‘Airing an Old Bag
Through a Sunny Window to Give it Air and Sunshine’. This
shows the need to regularly clean out old and outworn habits,
belongings and attitudes. Sometimes we accumulate so many bits
and pieces, the vast majority being possessions from the past,
that our lives can become clogged up and stagnant. Along with
our physical world, this can also apply to our minds, emotions
and memories.
Oracle: By holding onto everything old or outworn in your
environment or, indeed, inside your self, you create clutter that
restricts your well-being and your future. Consider discarding
anything that doesn’t measure up. Do you really need these
possessions, habits or thoughts these days? Bringing these things
to the outer world will enable you to see if they are still relevant
or useful in the clear light of day. Taking time to clean up old
habits and memories can change things for the better. What
relevance do these things have for your future? It can be good
to clean out your cupboards and drawers and get the dust out of
all the corners. Washing sheets, towels and clothes can remove
that old and moldy feeling. Doing this may inspire solutions to old
problems. It is a good opportunity to move to sunnier conditions,
wherever or whatever these may be. It is probably important to
talk about things that are bothering you. It may be wise to talk
through your thoughts and ideas with someone you trust. You
will then be able to make better sense of what’s going on. In the
process you may learn a lot about yourself. Just be careful not to
reveal too much, to too many people. Act with discretion. Now is
the time to seize the moment—bring light and air to everything
you can, inside and out.
Keywords: Psychoanalysis. Past life regressions or memories.
Doing domestic chores with a feeling of purpose. Work
shopping ideas. Bringing light and freshness to old feelings.
Renewal. Throwing out the old or outlived. Cleaning out rooms.
Renovations. Letting the sunshine in.
TheCaution: Expecting others to take responsibility for cleaning
up and airing out. Hanging on to outworn things and memories.
Airing one’s ‘dirty laundry’ in public. Rehashing old situations.
Going over the same ground over and over. Bringing up issues
when it’s inappropriate. Depressed attitudes.
Taurus 18
Better keep yourself clean and
bright;you are the window
through which you must see
the world.
George Bernard Shaw
God doesn’t seek for golden
vessels,and does not ask for
silver ones,but He must have
clean ones.
Dwight L.Moody
Cleanliness is next to godliness.
JohnWesley
A new broom sweeps clean.
Romanian Proverb
It was not ...that she was
unaware of the frayed and
ragged edges of life.She would
merely iron them out with a
firm hand and neatly hem them
down.
P.D.James
A safe but sometimes chilly way
of recalling the past is to force
open a crammed drawer.If you
are searching for anything in
particular,you don’t find it,but
something falls out at the back
that is often more interesting.
James Matthew Barrie
No country has washed more
dirty laundry in public than we
have.
ShirleyTemple Black
Cleanliness is next to
impossible.
Saying

<<<PAGE 72>>>
TAURUS
R
49
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A NEW CONTINENT IS RISING OUT
OF THE OCEAN
Commentary: The Symbol of ‘A New Continent Rising Out of the
Ocean’ is a powerful image of new opportunities and a whole new
sphere of operation. When a land mass emerges from the ocean
– the ‘New Continent’ that is ‘Rising’ – there is usually some kind
of eruption or disruption that precedes it. A whole field of activity
is coming to light as a fresh, new arena of opportunity erupts.
Oracle: A ‘New Continent’ is ‘Rising Out of the Ocean’; it might
feel as though it is coming out of nowhere, or from somewhere
you didn’t expect, however things have probably been building
up for some time. Perhaps you saw it coming, or maybe you
weren’t aware that the changes would go as far as they have.
One thing’s for sure: it is coming from somewhere deep within
your emotional and spiritual development. There is a promise of
rewards and brand new beginnings. However, this is probably
only the beginning. There is much work to be done developing
this possibility into something fertile and productive. Observe
and learn from the things that are erupting into your conscious
reality. You will (or will have to) find that extra spark to create
a brand new, original opportunity. What is possible, and what is
not, will become more obvious as time goes on. You may feel a
little alienated in this new ‘Continent’ or sphere of activity, but
that’s only relative to the conditions of what it is that you’re leaving
behind. There has probably been a recent period of throwing out
things that haven’t worked, or cluttered up your life and been in
the way of your forward growth. What you’ve done or achieved
in the past has led to this, but these new beginnings need to be
met with a fresh sense of purpose, confidence and possibility.
Keywords: Enormous potentiality emerging. New trends and
ways of being. Sudden eruptions of talent or fields of endeavor.
The greenhouse effect. Global warming. Atlantis and other
ancient underwater cities. Evolution. Patience. Developing slowly
but surely. Emerging generations of people. New environments.
Things feeling suddenly foreign. The birth of a nation. Migration.
Land masses. Endeavouring to hold life together under the
enormous pressure of the new.
The Caution: Continually seeking “new worlds” rather than
finding a place in the existing one. No responsibility for the birth
of the new. No respect for the old or established. Not shifting or
evolving. Staying stuck in old realities.
Taurus 19
One does not discover new
continents without consenting
to lose sight of the shore for a
very long time.
Andre Gide
AUSTRALIA,n.A country lying in
the South Sea,whose industrial
and commercial development
has been unspeakably retarded
by an unfortunate dispute
among geographers as to
whether it is a continent or an
island.
Ambrose Bierce
Today,the treacherous,
unexplored areas of the world
are not in continents or seas
– they are in the minds of men.
Allen Claxton
I know that Nature designs that
this whole continent,not merely
these thirty-six states,shall
be,sooner or later,within the
magic circle of the American
union.
William Seward
Nay,be a Columbus to whole
new continents and worlds
within you,opening new
channels,not of trade,but of
thought.
Henry DavidThoreau
There are continents and seas
in the moral world,to which
every man is an isthmus or inlet,
yet unexplored by him.
Henry DavidThoreau

<<<PAGE 73>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
50
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
WISPS OF CLOUDS,LIKE WINGS,ARE
STREAMING ACROSS THE SKY
Commentary: The ‘Wisps of Clouds’ are ‘Like Wings Streaming
Across the Sky’. This Symbol implies emotions or situations that
are shifting and can feel as though they could change direction
quickly. The ‘Wisps of Clouds’ and can indicate fleeting moments
and conditions that aren’t stable or have any longevity. Sometimes
we look up at clouds, such as those shown here, in awe and
wonder at how fast they are racing, and here they are seen
‘Streaming Across the Sky’.
Oracle: You may feel driven forward, almost out of your own
control. In doing so you run the risk of either going past things
too quickly, or tiring if you try to resist the momentum of forward
push. It may be best to let the superficial excitement affect you
and then be prepared to go back and sort out the details later.
However, there can be a danger in making decisions and taking
action too quickly; without enough consideration. You may find
that you have no choice. You have an opportunity before you,
and it could feel like it’s now or never and you must seize the day.
Another element of this Symbol is that there can be very little
actually going on around you, but there is so much going on over
your head. Your imagination is active, but perhaps you are not
really aware of it. You may find that your mind is working out
what to do in this situation and in the next day or so “the coin will
drop”. Enjoying the pleasant “weather” around you and allowing
the natural energies to blow away the confusing aspects of your
life will lead to things being sorted out before too long.
Keywords: Fleeting opportunities or inspiration. Feeling things
“in the wind”. Seeking a change in the weather. Thinking on your
feet. Doing things at a fast pace. Placing too much importance
on the fast movement of the issue at hand. Wasting energy
on nonessentials. Things floating in the air. Going at full tilt.
Skywriting. Vapor trails. Things, here one minute—gone the next.
Messages read from clouds. Planes. The beauty of the sky.
The Caution: Resistance to the creative flow. Superficial
excitement. Unstoppable progress. Destructive development.
Forces beyond your control. Making unformed or uninformed
decisions on a whim. Not thinking things through. Impatience.
Continual impermanence. Lack of rest or sleep. Contrails. Weather
control. Overcast skies.
Taurus 20
The golden moments in the
stream of life rush past us,and
we see nothing but sand;the
angels come to visit us,and we
only know them when they are
gone.
George Eliot
Every event that a man would
master must be mounted
on the run,and no man ever
caught the reins of a thought
except as it galloped past him.
OliverWendell Holmes
I am not a speed-reader.I am a
speed understander.
Isaac Asimov
All human joys are swift of wing,
For heaven doth so allot it;That
when you get an easy thing,You
find you haven’t got it.
Eugene Field
The cloud never comes in the
quarter of the horizon from
which we watch for it.
Elizabeth Gaskell
Every cloud has a silver lining.
Proverb
A great wind is blowing,
and that gives you either
imagination or a headache.
Catherine the Great

<<<PAGE 74>>>
TAURUS
R
51
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MOVING FINGER POINTS TO
SIGNIFICANT PASSAGES IN A BOOK
Commentary: ‘A Moving Finger’ is said to be pointing to
‘Significant Passages in a Book’. This speaks about information
being sought through the written word. However, the ‘Moving
Finger’ can also be your own thoughts, suggestions from those
around you, or inspirations from meditations or dreams. Whatever
the ‘Book’ may be, it will contain ‘Significant Passages’, it will
tell you something useful and necessary now. It can be a classic
of literature, or it can be something as every day as a street map
or telephone book.
Oracle: In your situation, something needs to be researched,
or looked up, in order to ‘Point To’ what is relevant and what is
not. When you realize what the ‘Significant Passages’ are, the
solution will become clear. Even if you feel you already know all
about it (like you have read the book) there is more information
to be gleaned by going carefully through what’s in front of you,
missing nothing. Fine details may have been overlooked or not
considered. Perhaps you need to check them out. However,
do be discriminating about what really is ‘Significant’ and
useful. Be wary of relying purely on the written word. Strict
applications of the written word can lead to a lack of innovation
and fundamentalism. Going by the ‘Book’ or the rules can be
useful and all to the good, but information is often best applied
to inspire creative and spontaneous solutions. Someone may be
mentally or emotionally “keeping a book” of the things that have
happened or have been done by others. If things are not quite
right at the moment, maybe you need to read, or pay attention
to, any instructions or lessons more carefully. Read the fine print
and look carefully at any conclusions or contracts. Also, solutions
can be found by flipping open a ‘Book’ and placing a finger on
a line or paragraph. This can lead to amazing insights into just
what is bothering you.
Keywords: Finding the essential details of a situation and
disregarding the rest. The cursor on the computer screen. Reading
and writing books. Keeping records. Instruction manuals. Lawyers
and the law. Editing. Reviewing. Reference books. Reading the
Oracle. Memories. Quoting scripture. Testimony. Rules.
TheCaution: Doing things because they need to be done and only
going by the rules of the book. Automated responses. Religious
fundamentalism. Only doing those things that are officially
sanctioned. Not observing the entire picture. Keeping tallies.
Flaunting the rules.
Taurus 21
The telephone book is full of
facts,but it doesn’t contain a
single idea.
Mortimer Adler
The man who does not read
good books has no advantage
over the man who cannot read
them.
MarkTwain
Beware the man of one book.
St.Thomas Aquinas
Close the book and open your
heart.
Nathan Rozenfarb—on
religious conflicts
The skilled theologian can
wrest from any scripture that
which will serve his purpose.
Bhagavad Gita
When I am attacked by gloomy
thoughts,nothing helps me so
much as running to my books.
They quickly absorb me and
banish the clouds from my mind.
Michel Eyquem de Montaigne
We sometimes get all the
information,but we refuse to get
the message.
Cullen Hightower
A verbal contract isn’t worth the
paper it’s written on.
Samuel Goldwyn
I hate quotations.
RalphWaldo Emerson

<<<PAGE 75>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
52
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Taurus 22
Peace can be reached through
meditation on the knowledge
which dreams give.Peace
can also be reached through
concentration upon that which
is dearest to the heart.
Patanjali
If you can’t be free,be a mystery.
Rita Dove
Flying might not be all plain
sailing,but the fun of it is worth
the price.
Amelia Earhart
O Swallow,Swallow,flying,
flying South,Fly to her,and fall
upon her gilded eaves,And tell
her,tell her,what I tell to thee.
Lord AlfredTennyson
I want to send the signal to our
enemy that you have aroused a
compassionate and decent and
mighty nation,and we’re going
to hunt you down.
George Bush Jnr
Loose lips sink ships.
Saying
Oh that I had wings like a dove!
For then I would fly away,and
be at rest.
The Bible
I survived that trouble so
likewise may I survive this one.
Anon
A WHITE DOVE FLYING STRAIGHT
AND FEARLESSLY OVER TROUBLED
WATERS
Commentary: The ‘White Dove’ is a reassuring Symbol of
messages regarding peace, hope and redemption. That the
‘White Dove’ is ‘Flying Straight and Fearlessly Over Troubled
Waters’ shows a clear mission that needs to be fulfilled, without
worrying about any personal consequences. Noah sent out a
‘White Dove’ from the Ark. It flew ‘Straight and Fearlessly Over
Troubled Waters’, bringing back an olive branch, a sign that
landfall was near and redemption was at hand.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the need for hope and help to be
delivered to those who need it. Although there may be trouble
all around, you will be able to rise above it and find safe ground.
Even though you may be lost from your loved ones’ sight for a
while and they may feel abandoned, you will eventually return
to them safely. Alternatively, you may be guiding them to safety
and reassurance or, they may be returning to you. Bringing hope,
sustenance and comfort to others is a blessing to all involved. The
‘Dove’ of this Symbol, by ‘Flying Straight and Fearlessly’, brings
the message to stay on course, go straight ahead and don’t worry
about what’s happening around you. Soon there will be a signal
of better times and relief from your concerns. Oftentimes it’s
not possible for us to see what is just beyond our sight, whether
we’re looking into the future or trying to understand the present.
If things that are outside of your control or influence ‘Trouble’
you, then you may need to ask for a message that will reassure
you. The ‘Dove’ is often portrayed as a Symbol of the soul. Try
sending out a ‘Dove’ from your spiritual center, and ask for what
you require in order to bring things back to safe ground again.
Equally, you may need to send a message to those who are feeling
left out and needing love and assistance.
Keywords: Transcending worries through spiritual awareness.
Prophetic missions. Peace. Healing messages from the “other side”.
Overcoming phobias. Fearlessness. Feelings of immortality. Going
straight for the objective. Calming troubled minds. Redemption
and messages of hope. Couriers.
The Caution: Being too caught up in worries. Not accepting that
things are getting better or accepting reassurance from others.
Not being cautious of risks. Being daunted by an ominous task.
Gossip. Spreading rumors.

<<<PAGE 76>>>
TAURUS
R
53
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A JEWELRY SHOP FILLED WITH THE
MOST MAGNIFICENT JEWELS
Commentary: ‘A Jewelry Shop Filled With the Most Magnificent
Jewels’ speaks of a high degree of integrity, talent and worth that
is able to be valued, seen and appreciated. There can be great
pleasure to be enjoyed in marking our achievement in life with
enduring and satisfying symbols, such as gemstones, jewelry or
crystals. Also, knowing how to recognize and appreciate talent,
joy and beauty can be its own reward.
Oracle: This is a time to admire the achievements of others
and allow yours to be admired too. Realize that what is needed
is either at hand, or soon will be. Believing in yourself can
bring a sense of reward, and can allow you to reach for higher
aspirations. If you need help believing in yourself, try wearing a
beautiful piece of jewelry that has a lot of meaning for you. This
can bring a wonderful sense of self worth, pride and beauty into
your life. Crystals and jewelry may be received, or somehow bring
a message. It can be a testament to how talented, gracious and
cultured our lives and achievements are. It is good to remember
that sometimes our most precious possessions are rarely truly
owned by us, they will most likely survive well beyond our time.
It is partly this longevity and contribution to the future that makes
them so precious. Having a piece of jewelry or crystal nearby can
be a reminder of your self-worth, beauty and integrity. Sometimes
buying a special piece, such as a crystal, a necklace, earrings, ring
or brooch can lift your spirits.
Keywords: Great talent, wealth, rewards and gifts. Beauty
that brings joy. Materialization of perfection. Judges of worth.
Things that shine. Jewelry, stones, gold and silver. Shops,
especially those that have beautiful displays. The rewards and
bounty of the natural world. Treasure of any description. Purity.
Genius. Crystals. Security guards. Window shopping. Personal
Adornments. Things that glimmer.
The Caution: Wanting more than one’s share of rewards and
spoils, even if there is plenty to share. Things for looking at, not
touching. Always wanting more. Being dazzled by possessions.
Greed. Stealing or wanting other people’s valuables. Superficial
displays. The need for security. Jealousy. Theft. Beauty that covers
up a lack of worth, talent or depth. Faking authenticity. Having
to have bars on the windows. Longing for ownership. Objects
of envy.
Taurus 23
If you really put a small value
upon yourself,rest assured that
the world will not raise your
price.
Anon
Your treasure house is within;
it contains all you’ll ever need.
Hui-Hai
The fortune,which nobody sees,
makes a person happy and
unenvied.
Francis Bacon
He does not posses wealth
that allows it to possess him.
Benjamin Franklin
Who finds a faithful friend,finds
a treasure.
Jewish Saying
Not on one strand are all life’s
jewels strung.
William Morris
The difference between false
memories and true ones is the
same as for jewels:it is always
the false ones that look the
most real,the most brilliant.
Salvador Dali
The man who treasures his
friends is usually solid gold
himself.
Marjorie Holmes
Treasure your relationships,not
your possessions.
Anthony J.D’Angelo

<<<PAGE 77>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
54
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INDIAN WARRIOR RIDING
FIERCELY WITH HUMAN SCALPS
HANGING AT HIS BELT
Commentary:‘AnIndianWarriorRidingFiercelyWithHumanScalps
HangingatHisBelt’isaSymbolofgreatforceandconquest.‘Scalping’
isoftenassociatedwithAmericanIndians.Longago,theEnglishpaid
bounties for Irish scalps. The Indians actually learnt the practice
of ‘Scalping’ from the Europeans, where it was a well-established
tradition. The original Indian tradition was for the ‘Warrior’ to steal
something from the person conquered to show how strong his
medicine was. Regardless, a vengeful heart creates only sadness for
all concerned, and there are no real winners in the end.
Oracle: Someone may have been holding back from pursuing what
they’ve wanted and are now going after all they can get. The “us
or them” mentality can lead to disputes, and separations and the
forgettingofasenseofotherpeople’shumanity.Perhapsyouhaven’t
been given a fair share of things by society, or these have literally
been taken from you. As a chain reaction can be set off with this
Symbol, there needs to be care taken that a real “war” is not started
with people seeking revenge. Consider everyone's rights as this
can point to the invasion of other people’s space or territory. There
may be a need for someone to mark their territory and claim their
dues. Look to see if there are barriers up to prevent invasions of
territory, yours or another’s. Be wary of excessive competition, in
the marketplace or the home, as this can scare people off – making
the environment unsafe and unsound. Taken to its extreme, this
Symbolcanpointtoall-outfeudsbetweenpeople.Alternatively,with
a level of controlled aggression and taking the necessary risks, you
can be recognized for your abilities as a successful leader, prepared
to face danger and succeed. Bravery and honor are often admired
and respected by others.
Keywords: Race wars. Claiming one’s soil. Trophies of conquest.
Aggression. Basic instincts. Territoriality. Chain reactions. Tit-for-tat.
Competitive natures. Risks for the clan or group. Trophies, medals
and diplomas. Striving for recognition and respect, deserved or
not. Blood and sacrifice. Tribes mourning their losses. Ritualistic
behaviors. Marking victories. War crimes. Ticket scalpers.
The Caution: Conquering others without emotion. Showing off
to intimidate others. Domination and ruthlessness. Taking things
because one can. Violation of other’s space. Testosterone. Feeling
takenadvantageof.Notchesonthebelt,orgun.Cyclesofretribution.
Vengeance. Taking scalps.
Taurus 24
To win without risk is to
triumph without glory.
Pierre Corneille
There is no decent place to
stand in a massacre.
Leonard Cohen
Do not throw the arrow which
will return against you.
Kurdish Proverb
Anger will never disappear so
long as thoughts of resentment
are cherished in the mind.
Anger will disappear just as
soon as thoughts of resentment
are forgotten.
Buddha
You win battles by knowing the
enemy’s timing,and using a
timing which the enemy does
not expect.
Miyamoto Musashi
Courage is being scared to
death but saddling up anyway.
JohnWayne
He that is not with me is against
me.
The Bible
There are many humorous
things in the world:among
them the white man’s notion
that he is less savage than the
other savages.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 78>>>
TAURUS
R
55
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGE WELL-KEPT PUBLIC PARK
Commentary: ‘A Large Public Park’ implies a big area of land
that has been kept aside from development for the enjoyment of
the ‘Public’. The fact that it is ‘Well-Kept’ shows that the ‘Park’
has gardens and public amenities, is well looked after and clean
of mess and rubbish. People are able to meet together, play ball,
lie in the sun and, perhaps, walk their dog in safety. There’s lots
of room to move and things are in their rightful place. In many
ways our society is a ‘Public Park’ and we each play a part in its
beauty and success, whether our contribution is by working on
the gardens or enjoying the amenities.
Oracle: You are part of something important, but you are only
a part. It is when everyone works together that we can create
a useful and lasting result that will be of benefit to the whole
community. However, in a controlled and interdependent
situation there can be the perception of a lack of privacy and
the inability to get completely away from others. Hence, you may
need to be mindful of the fact that other people can always see
what you are doing. The best thing is to work together to create
the cooperation and consideration that will afford privacy for all
areas of life. In this situation it is not only a right, but also a well-
earned reward. ‘Parks’ are for recreation, but are you aware of
what recreation means to you? Are you in a balanced state of work
and play? Your leisure time needs to be tended to and organized,
as much as your work life. However, a lot of maintenance may
be required just to keep the situation under control. Also, others
may have a vested interest in taking over the space or using it for
something that wasn’t intended, such as property development.
Every community needs an area for recreation and enjoyment and
it should be protected, nourished and looked after.
Keywords: Paying attention to appearances. People living in
peace. Space for everyone. People taking to the streets. Park
benches, swings, slippery dips and sandpits. Charities and their
work. Maintaining order. Gardens and gardening. Town planning.
Work of the few for the pleasure of the many. Appearances kept
immaculate. Golf and other sports. Picnics. Eating alfresco.
Meeting others out in the open. Large plots of land. Acreage.
Subdividing and development. Suburbia.
The Caution: Difficulty in finding privacy. People continually
coming by. Having so much to look after without much help.
Public possessions being sold off for the benefit of a few. Mugging
and robberies. Littering and graffiti.
Taurus 25
Civilization is the progress
toward a society of privacy.
The savage’s whole existence is
public,ruled by the laws of his
tribe.Civilization is the process
of setting man free from men.
Ayn Rand
The materials of city planning
are:sky,space,trees,steel and
cement,in that order and that
hierarchy.
Le Corbusier
When you see the earth from
space,you don’t see any
divisions of nation-states there.
This may be the symbol of the
new mythology to come;this is
the country we will celebrate,
and these are the people we are
one with.
Joseph Campbell
He enjoys true leisure who has
time to improve his soul’s estate.
Henry DavidThoreau
If you are losing your leisure,
look out!You are losing your
soul.
Logan Pearsall Smith
The primary purpose of a liberal
education is to make one’s
mind a pleasant place in which
to spend one’s leisure.
Sydney J.Harris

<<<PAGE 79>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
56
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SPANIARD SERENADING HIS
SENORITA
Commentary: ‘A Spaniard Serenading His Senorita’ is a lovely
image of singing, music, romance and love. The ‘Spaniard’ pours
his heart out to his beloved in the hope that she will listen and
respond to his advances. Beautiful words and music can lift
the spirits and we all need a little romance now and then! The
‘Spaniard’ is ‘Serenading’ his love, his ‘Senorita’, who may or
may not know the depth of his feelings. Whether she accepts his
advances or rejects them, this need not stop him from celebrating
his feelings in a show of emotion.
Oracle: In this situation there is no guarantee of getting your
message across, but you must act if you expect any chance of
success. It is by being brave and confident enough to put our
feelings on public display that we can convince others of our
sincerity. It is possible that the worst that could be damaged is
your ego, so think positively and play your role with enthusiasm
and passion. However, be wary of insincerity or coming on too
strongly. This Symbol can also point to people covering up their
real feelings because they are looking for a calculated response
from another. This ‘Serenade’ should not be like some kind of
desperate act, but, instead, an act of devotion and love. True
expressions of feeling can lead to grand actions and reactions.
The situation around the question is full of emotion and passion.
To say “I love you” or “I care for you” or “I believe in you” or “I
trust you” to those who want to hear it makes it even more special
and encouraging. The confirmation of deep feelings is rewarding
to all involved.
Keywords: Looking through pretence. Shared feelings, love or
passion. Spontaneity. Welling expressions of romance. Being in
tune with another. Soul mates. Chivalry. Reverting back to old
methods of relating. Spinning tales to get a response. Knowing
what to say and when. Music, singing, crooning, talking.
Instruments. The use of the voice. Foreign voices. Guitars. Getting
one's message across.
The Caution: A ruse performed to achieve a goal by deception.
Lies, deceit and propaganda. Not believing messages given by
loved ones. Feeling like something is missing from a relationship.
Superficial judgments of how things should look or be. Emotional
manipulation. Selfish agendas. Things said merely to sway
someone's feelings. Empty promises or declarations. Pouring
out the heart to deaf ears.
Taurus 26
When love is not madness,it is
not love.
Spanish Proverb
Flattery is like cologne water,to
be smelt of,not swallowed.
Josh Billings
Latins are tenderly enthusiastic.
In Brazil they throw flowers at
you.In Argentina they throw
themselves.
Marlene Dietrich
If music be the food of love,play
on.
William Shakespeare
You’re the Nile,You’re theTower
of Pisa,You’re the smile,On the
Mona Lisa.
Cole Porter
Tell me about yourself—your
struggles,your dreams,your
telephone number.
Peter Arno
The first man to compare the
cheeks of a young woman to a
rose was obviously a poet;the
first to repeat it was possibly an
idiot.
Salvador Dali
Give her two red roses,each
with a note.The first note says,
“For the woman I love”and the
second,“For my best friend.”
Anon

<<<PAGE 80>>>
TAURUS
R
57
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD INDIAN WOMAN SELLING
BEADS AND TRINKETS
Commentary: ‘An Old Indian Woman’ is ‘Selling Beads and
Trinkets’. She probably spends a great deal of her time selling
these small products of her culture for very little reward or real
monetary return. The modern, and somewhat foreign, world often
shows little regard and doesn’t respect the crafts and skills that
are probably well respected within her tribe. Despite this lack
of appreciation, the ‘Old Indian Woman’ can still enjoy a deep
understanding of her self worth and the dignity of her identity and
tribal origins. However, she may be capable of much more: that
she is reduced to ‘Selling Beads and Trinkets’ is a measure of the
poor treatment this world gives to those who are less fortunate,
older, or who have fewer resources for making a living.
Oracle: Do not underestimate yourself or restrict yourself to what
you think others believe you are capable of. Everybody has talents
and abilities, including you. You may be placing limitations on
your capabilities and it is it these very limitations that can truly
reveal to you hidden talents and skills that are sometimes taken
for granted. Having belief in what you’re doing will bring rewards
at the end of the day. Sometimes it is necessary to do things that
seem below your true station in life in order to survive, but true
survival begins in your heart and your belief in yourself. Positive
affirmations are useful at this time – have faith in yourself and
the products of your culture. Don’t wait for passers-by to stop
and pay attention to you or what you have to offer. Regardless of
their actual monetary value, these ‘Beads and Trinkets’, whatever
they may be, can be beautiful, worthwhile and useful souvenirs
to both yourself and others.
Keywords: Older, wiser elements of society making offerings to
the younger, less integrated. Small, but worthy products. Adapting
to changing conditions, particularly monetary or financial.
Working hard for small returns and rewards. Battling against
the odds. Selling the products of one’s culture. Artifacts. Jewelry.
Handicrafts. Retailing. Supplying the populace with beautiful
things. Markets and stalls. Patience. Bartering and bargaining.
The Caution: Looking down on those that seem less fortunate.
Loss of culture and traditional duties. Menial jobs. Devaluing
things or overvaluing junk. Feeling that you have nothing to offer.
Waiting for others to validate your worth. Bickering over money.
Feeling 'cursed' with one's lot in life. Lack of the respect for the
arts. Being stuck in the marketplace. Sweat shops.
Taurus 27
Accomplishment of purpose
is better than making a profit.
Hausa Proverb
There are very honest people
who do not think that they
have had a bargain unless
they have cheated a merchant.
Anatole France
Perhaps middle age is,or should
be,a period of shedding shells:
the shell of ambition,the shell
of material accumulations and
possessions,and the shell of the
ego.
Anne Morrow Lindbergh
Business has only two basic
functions—marketing and
innovation.
Peter Drucker
Each man takes care that his
neighbor shall not cheat him.
But a day comes when he
begins to care that he does not
cheat his neighbor.Then all
goes well —he has changed his
market-cart into a chariot of
the sun.
RalphWaldo Emerson
We get paid for bringing value
to the market place.
Jim Rohn
By virtue of exchange,one
man's prosperity is beneficial to
all others.
Frederic Bastiat

<<<PAGE 81>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
58
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AWOMANINMIDDLELIFESTANDS
INRAPTSUDDENREALIZATIONOF
FORGOTTENCHARMS,INUNEXPECTED
RECOVERYOFROMANCE
Commentary: The ‘Woman in Middle Life’ has found an
‘Unexpected Recovery of Romance’. She has realized that ‘Romance’
is not something that is only for the young; there is no time limit on
the possibility of love and passion. The ‘Woman’ has found herself in
‘Rapt Sudden Realization’ and her ‘Romantic’ longings and feelings
have come flooding back. On the physical level, there can be a rush
of hormones that back up these feelings. This Symbol shows that a
surprising ‘Realization’ can lead to sudden and overpowering joy.
Oracle: Love and 'Romance' can dawn on us ‘Suddenly’. When we
areconfrontedbyloveitcancomeasasurpriseaspassionsriseagain
in our lives. No matter what your age, there can be the ‘Realization’
that the ‘Charms’ of life have not deserted you, and it is unwise to
listen to those who try to suppress or judge. These feelings of love
can be very strong as one is no longer flushed with the naiveté and
innocence of youth. It can be even better now because you know
the pitfalls and can value and make the most of what’s happening.
You know not to be falsely swept off your feet and misguided by
overreaction. Also, this should not be a time of desperation where
you have to take whatever love and attention you can get. With
a mature attitude, you can have a deep understanding of what is
possible and you can choose to become involved, or not, for all
the right reasons. Even if the ‘Romance’ fades, you will find a new
lease of life through a reawakening to life’s possibilities. However,
‘Romance’ can indicate many things; it can be a new passion for
cooking,gardening,painting,music,astrology–anything.Anything
that lights the fires in the heart can be ‘Romantic’—so open your
heart and enjoy. Enjoy life more and more. This positive shift can
lead to many good things—one of them could be a new lease of
life itself.
Keywords: Findingarenewaloflove,knowledge,andinterestwhen
it looked like all opportunities had passed. Second chances. Starting
over. Menopause. Romance renewed. Awakening to life’s promises.
Flowering of love, life and joy. Sudden realizations.
The Caution: Believing love and romance long gone. Denying
emotional expression because of social expectation. Losing
heart and feeling unloved. Having no time for romance due to
responsibilities. Being skeptical of love, thinking it not possible or
realistic. Resenting the aged finding love. Fickleness.
Taurus 28
If grass can grow through
cement,love can find you at
every time in your life.
Cher
Probably the happiest period in
life most frequently is in middle
age,when the eager passions
of youth are cooled,and the
infirmities of age not yet begun.
Thomas Arnold
We in middle age require
adventure.
Amanda Cross
One of the many things nobody
ever tells you about middle age
is that it’s such a nice change
from being young.
Dorothy Canfield Fisher
Middle age is when you’re
sitting at home on Saturday
night and the telephone rings
and you hope it isn’t for you.
Ogden Nash
It heartens me to think ofVerdi
who composed thundering
operas in his eighties;
Michelangelo who did fine
work in his ninetieth year,and
Titian,who painted better
than ever in his one hundredth.
James Michener
Aging is not‘lost youth’but a
new stage of opportunity and
strength.
Betty Friedan

<<<PAGE 82>>>
TAURUS
R
59
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO COBBLERS WORKING SIDE BY
SIDE AT A TABLE
Commentary: The ‘Two Cobblers’ are ‘Working Side by Side at
a Table’. ‘Cobblers’ make and repair shoes and shoes cover and
protect the feet. In a spiritual context the feet are said to be the
symbol of “understanding”. The ‘Cobblers’ are working together
‘Side by Side’ and yet both are accomplished in their own unique
way. Because there are ‘Two’ of them, they may see things in quite
contrasting ways, which can enrich any projects they undertake.
Equal partnerships can bring a sense of greater accomplishment
to projects or the tasks at hand. The 'Cobblers' work together
with cooperation and mutual respect, bringing their individual
talents and tools to the ‘Table’.
Oracle: In order to get the best results, you need to work
cooperatively with someone who has skills that are equal or
complimentary to yours, along with a sharing of similar interests.
A partnership that brings together talent and energy will achieve a
lot more than any solo effort now. If someone has talents that you
don’t, this can lead to a greater sharing of knowledge, resources
and materials. By sharing tasks without ego or competition
the outcome is not only better, but also more harmonious and
satisfying. It may be that you are looking for someone who can
compliment your work. This Symbol implies that such a person
will materialize. Remember the importance of your part and
what you contribute. It is also important not to allow jealousy to
interfere with any working partnership. The rewards along with
the toil need to be shared. Couples working successfully at a task
or duty can end up learning more about each other and the world
they inhabit. However, if working together closely is not exercised
carefully, it may bring feelings of criticism and judgment. Equality
and respect is important. Done successfully, this will ensure that
people will want to continue working ‘Side by Side’.
Keywords: People sharing quietly and persistently in their
labor. Equal opportunities and equal responsibilities. Skills
complimenting one another. Sharing materials, tools and tasks.
Repairs to the soul. Reflexology. Partnerships. Work benches.
Demarcations of work. The marriage of minds.
The Caution: Attempting to complete a task with shared
responsibilities and yet gain all the credit. Committing to tasks
that don’t bring real satisfaction or reward. Fighting over “who has
to do what”. Bickering. Feeling like one’s work is not appreciated.
Arguing over the use of appliances or tools. Co-dependance.
Taurus 29
Two heads are better than one.
Old Saying
Two are better than one
because they have a good
reward for their labor.For if
they fall,one will lift up his
companion.But woe to him
who is alone when he falls,for
he has no one to help lift him
up.
The Bible
A problem shared is a problem
halved.
Old Saying
He that would perfect his work
must first sharpen his tools.
Confucius
If two men on a job agree all
the time,then one is useless.If
they disagree all the time,then
both are useless.
Darryl F.Zanuck
When two men in business
always agree,one of them is
unnecessary.
WilliamWrigley,Jr.
Forty for you,sixty for me,And
equal partners we will be.
Gerald Barzan
I was always an independent,
even when I had partners.
Samuel Goldwyn

<<<PAGE 83>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
R
60
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PEACOCK PARADING ON THE
TERRACE OF AN OLD CASTLE
Commentary: ‘A Peacock’ is ‘Parading’, showing off his fine
feathers and beauty. Peacocks were often installed in regal
palaces as a show of opulence or extravagance. This ‘Peacock’
is ‘Parading on the Terrace of an Old Castle’ which shows that he
is in a place that has all of the trappings of wealth and tradition.
The situation is probably well established, but as it is ‘Old’, it
is probably also slowly breaking apart and showing signs of
crumbling. ‘Peacocks’ can be a reminder of the “grand old days”.
They are very territorial and will remain in a place long after the
people have gone. Because of the many eyes displayed on their
feathers they are said to be forever awake. ‘Peacocks’ are used as
guard dogs in India because they make a shrieking noise when
they perceive intrusion or danger.
Oracle: In this situation there is a need to maintain your grace
and pride whilst also maintaining a sense of being the center of
attention. Polite behavior and the correct presentation of form
are of vital importance and pride in one’s inheritance is to be
admired, but not overdone. Too much pride, and elitism, can
lead to a feeling of being alone and the roof collapsing in on
what was possibly once a magnificent empire. Remember: pride
comes before a fall. You may have to accept that your situation or
location may one day change, even if you fear that much will be
lost. The key is to enjoy the beauty that is around you every day
and take your sense of beauty and elegance with you everywhere
you go. This Symbol can also point to people showing off and
thinking they’re better than others because of social prestige. Is
there any danger of invasion of some kind?
Keywords: Tradition feeding ego-centered attraction. Grace and
dignity. Splendor. Etiquette. Gardening. Enjoying the environment
for its nature and beauty. Peacocks as “the watchers” and the
Argus. Parading beauty. Beautiful old buildings. Empires that
require protection. Issues of belonging and being allowed in.
Prominent families. Inherited values. Castles and rambling
estates. Beautiful colors.
The Caution: Risking integrity to display success. Strutting one’s
stuff. Inviting envy from others. Believing that one is all things to
many people. Overloading others. Showing off and demanding
acknowledgment. Trying to convince others of something. Noisy
displays of wealth. Neglected buildings.
Taurus 30
It is neither wealth nor splendor,
but tranquility and occupation
that give happiness.
Thomas Jefferson
He enjoys true leisure who has
time to improve his soul’s estate.
Henry DavidThoreau
A peacock who sits on his tail is
just another turkey.
Proverb
It is not only fine feathers that
make fine birds.
Aesop
The sparrow is sorry for the
peacock at the burden of his
tail.
RabindranathTagore
The house of every one is to
him as his castle and fortress.
Edward Coke
Genius and virtue are to be
more often found clothed in
gray than in peacock bright.
VanWyck Brooks
As long as you’re going to be
thinking anyway,think big.
Donald J.Trump
A rich man is nothing but a
poor man with money.
W.C.Fields
A heart in love with beauty
never grows old.
Turkish Proverb

<<<PAGE 84>>>
GEMINI
T
6­
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GLASS-BOTTOMED BOAT
REVEALS UNDERSEA WONDERS
Commentary: ‘A Glass-Bottomed Boat’ pictures a vessel that
enables people to see underwater. It ‘Reveals Undersea Wonders’;
we can observe the marvels of this “other world” through the lens
of the glass, while remaining safe, dry and at a distance. Without
this particular type of “lens”, the ‘Glass’, it would be impossible to
see so much or so clearly. The ‘Wonders’ of a normally unobserved
world are brought into clearer focus. What is being observed is
something quite separate from the observer, and yet it feels so
close, almost like one could reach out and touch it.
Oracle: This Symbol implies that you can look at issues to do with
your situation from an uninvolved and yet observing, knowing,
perspective. This may be because the situation is separated, or
away, from your natural environment. Take some time out to calmly
observe what’s going on around you. Things previously unseen or
not understood will become evident. A distant, possibly uninvolved
position is probably much safer for you as you can observe from a
calm and detached perspective. As you have a special lens at your
disposal, like the ‘Glass-Bottomed Boat’, you will see much more
than you might at first think. Adopt an attitude of being able to see
through superficial appearances to what is actually there and what
is really happening. You can get beneath the surface with a little
concentration, and there can be incredible rewards if you focus
on the task at hand. There are likely to be insights revealed that
you could only have imagined before. Things may be revealed in a
clairvoyant or intuitive way, with images and thoughts streaming
across your mind. Imagine yourself with a new set of glasses or
goggles that enable you to see through the apparent surface of
things, down into the depths. Marvelous things can be ‘Revealed’
with just a little effort, concentration and focus.
Keywords: Being able to see “within” to forms that are not
usually observed by others. Clairvoyance. Observance of psychic
phenomena. Connecting with the collective unconscious. Spiritual
gifts that enlarge ones perspective. Amusement and wonder at
natural beauty. Glass, lenses, refractions of light. Panoramic views.
Water. Boats. Vehicles of discovery.
The Caution: Putting up barriers of social safety to avoid
involvement in deep emotions. Overemphasis on safety concerns.
Watching things from a distance, leading to separation and
estrangement. Looking in the wrong direction. Cool, detached
attitudes.
Gemini 1
There’s none so blind as they
that won’t see.
Jonathan Swift
“Truth is naturally universal,”
said Akananda,“and shines
into many different windows,
though some of them are
clouded.”
Anya Seton
The eyes are the window to the
soul.
Traditional Proverb
Seeing is believing.
Traditional Proverb
Meditation is the soul’s
perspective glass.
Owen Felltham
Nature is the glass reflecting
God,as by the sea reflected
is the sun,too glorious to be
gazed on in its sphere.
BrighamYoung
Our house is made of glass ...
and our lives are made of glass;
and there is nothing we can do
to protect ourselves.
Joyce Carol Oates
The world will never starve for
want of wonders;but only for
want of wonder.
Gilbert Keith Chesterton

<<<PAGE 85>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
6­
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A NERVOUS GENTLEMAN,DRESSED
IN AN ELABORATE SANTA CLAUS
COSTUME,IS FILLING CHRISTMAS
STOCKINGS SECRETLY
Commentary: ‘A Nervous Gentleman, Dressed in an Elaborate
Santa Claus Costume, is Filling Christmas Stockings Secretly’.
‘Stockings’ are hung by the chimney in the hope of getting good
things from ‘Santa Claus’, otherwise known as St. Nicholas. The
story of ‘Santa Claus’ and the ‘Christmas Stocking’ tells us that,
out of compassion, Santa tossed three coins down the chimney of
the home of three poor sisters. Each coin fell neatly into each of
the ‘Stockings’ left drying by the hearth. We therefore leave our
‘Stocking’ out in anticipation that a similar bit of good fortune will
befall us. He appears to be ‘Nervous’ and acting ‘Secretly’; sneaking
around. He wants to get his job done before the household wakes
and he is discovered doing his rounds.
Oracle: Someone may be tiptoeing around, like ‘Santa Claus’ in
an effort to give out gifts while no one is looking. Be gracious and
let those carrying the gifts have the pleasure of your reaction.
You may, however, draw this Symbol in a situation where you are
suspicious of someone being up to something. This Symbol may
be saying that your fears are possibly not only unfounded, but
can actually be quite wrong. You need to believe that something
good is happening, and trust those involved in this situation. It
may be you who is trying to surprise someone with a gift. Perhaps
the giver in this situation is you? It is not necessarily the gift, but
more the thought that counts. What would happen if the lights
were suddenly turned on? Would things suddenly be known and
revealed that were not apparent or visible before?
Keywords:Wishesfulfilled.Thelongingforsuperficialgratification.
Gifts being dispensed. Receiving from unknown sources. Giving for
no particular reason or thought of reward for one’s self. Rewards
coming. Making surprise visits. Token gestures. Furtive acts.
Charity. Philanthropy. Masturbation. Secret affairs. The need for
quick getaways.
The Caution: Hiding true gestures behind futile pretence.
Concealing true intentions with a façade of goodness. Trying to
get away with something. Stealing, shoplifting. Intrusion. Giving
others what they want in a sly and secretive manner. Sneaking
around in the dark. Bribes. Self-gratification. Eavesdropping and
voyeurism. Being nervous or easily startled.
Gemini 2
The greatest pleasure I have
known is to do good action by
stealth,and to have it found out
by accident.
Charles Lamb
I stopped believing in Santa
Claus when I was six.Mother
took me to see him in a
department store and he asked
for my autograph.
ShirleyTemple Black
I feel like the cat that ate the
canary some days.
Bill Clinton
‘Twas the night before
Christmas,when all through
the house,not a creature was
stirring,not even a mouse.The
stockings were hung by the
chimney,in the hope that St.
Nicholas would soon be there.
Clement C.Moore
I never believed in Santa Claus
because I knew no white
dude would come into my
neighborhood after dark.
Dick Gregory
Santa Claus has the right idea:
visit people once a year.
Victor Borge
I like to deliver more than I
promise instead of the other
way around.Which is just one
of my many trade secrets.
Dorothy Uhnak

<<<PAGE 86>>>
GEMINI
T
63
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE CHARMING COURT LIFE AT THE
GARDEN OF THE TUILERIES IN PARIS
Commentary: ‘The Charming Court Life at the Garden of the
Tuileries’ is a picture of elegance, riches and many of the things
that comprise the “good life”. ‘The Garden of the Tuileries’ was
huge, magnificent, well manicured and was said to have had up to
20,000 gardeners and servants working in the grounds. There was
most likely barely a leaf out of place. People came together in this
opulence to discuss politics, to enjoy the rich ambiance and each
other. It must have been a ‘Charming Court Life’ indeed!
Oracle: This is a time to enjoy the rewards of beauty, order, self-
confidence and authority that you and others have developed
and achieved. There may be a need to remember, however, that
this does not make you, or those in your situation, greater, better
or more deserving than others. The work you’ve done simply
entitles you to a little luxury. Over time it is possible to develop
your surroundings, both in possessions and spirit, to reflect the
experiences of your life. This Symbol asks you to enjoy what you
have achieved as it is a true expression of your self and those
around you. Are you relaxed and comfortable enough to feel that
you can maintain it, enjoy it or, indeed, deserve it? Perhaps you
need the help of others to attain or maintain this lifestyle. The
‘Garden’ is not restricted only to those who create it with financial
wealth; it is available to all who share in its day-to-day life. It
is also beautiful if it reflects a sense of spiritual wealth. Do you
appreciate the health, wealth and beauty that surrounds you? Envy
and jealousy need to be put aside, as these can lead to emotional
alienation. Diplomacy, tact and skill will enable you to move more
towards the center of this ‘Charming Court Life’. Be grateful for
all that you have, strive for the best and many wonderful things
can be yours.
Keywords: A love of form and tradition. Cultivation of beautiful
places. Symmetry of form being shown at its best. Gardens and
gardeners. Garden ornaments. Statues. Having hired help to keep
things beautiful or under one’s control. Taking time to work in
the garden. Going first class. Being in the inner circle. Pots, plants.
Wealth. Tradition. Affluence and influence. Big houses and rooms.
Ample amenities.
The Caution: Behaving in an elitist fashion. Being bossy.
Snobbishness that separates people from each other. Being spoilt
and shallow. Having more than one truly needs. Treating people
like underlings or servants. Expecting others to do everything.
Class-consciousness.
Gemini 3
Let us be grateful to people who
make us happy;they are the
charming gardeners who make
our souls blossom.
Marcel Proust
To laugh often and much;to
win the respect of intelligent
people and the affection
of children;to earn the
appreciation of honest critics
and endure the betrayal of false
friends;to appreciate beauty;to
find the best in others;to leave
the world a bit better,whether
by a healthy child,a garden
patch or a redeemed social
condition;to know even one life
has breathed easier because
you have lived.This is to have
succeeded.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Pleasure for one hour,a bottle
of wine.Pleasure for one year
a marriage;but pleasure for a
lifetime,a garden.
Chinese Proverb
We must never confuse
elegance with snobbery.
Yves Saint Laurent
We are all born charming,fresh,
and spontaneous and must
be civilized before we are fit to
participate in society.
Judith Martin

<<<PAGE 87>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
64
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
HOLLY AND MISTLETOE BRING
CHRISTMAS SPIRIT TO A HOME
Commentary: ‘Holly and Mistletoe Bring Christmas Spirit to a
Home’ is a wonderfully warm and inviting image. The ancient
Druids of Britain regarded ‘Mistletoe’ as sacred and believed it
had both magical powers and medicinal properties. They referred
to it as the “heal all,” although now we know the berries can be
poisonous, so care needs to be taken with them. “Kissing beneath
the Mistletoe” is a tradition that has developed over the years as we
have built barriers to more spontaneous expressions of affection.
It is almost as though the ‘Mistletoe’ and the ‘Spirit of Christmas’
have become an excuse for us to be able to show our feelings. We
have developed these types of rituals to compensate for what has
truly been lost. ‘Mistletoe’ was so sacred to the Druids that if two
enemies met beneath a tree on which ‘Mistletoe’ was growing,
they would lay down their weapons, exchange greetings and
observe a 24-hour truce.
Oracle: ‘Christmas’ represents a time when we can reconnect
with loved ones, family, or, in a larger sense, humanity, to discover
the strengths and joys in the cultural and religious bonds that hold
families and people together. However, we don’t have to wait until
a special celebration such as ‘Christmas’ to feel close to friends
and family. The openness that the ‘Holly and Mistletoe’ represents
should be carried in our hearts always and not restricted merely
to a few days of the year. Realizing how important those near and
dear to us really are, we should put in the effort to reach out to
others at any time. It is not just about acknowledging these bonds,
but also affectionately embracing them. ‘Mistletoe’ is said to
represent regeneration and the restoration of family life. Perhaps
it is time to bring that ‘Spirit’ of peace and reconciliation into the
home and the family, regardless of the time or the season.
Keywords: Social celebrations of the spirit. Returning to basic
joys. Remembering past celebrations of family and social cohesion.
Kissing under the mistletoe. Simple gestures that remind us of
larger realities. Warmth, joy and anticipation. The Festive Season.
The spirit of special occasions.
The Caution: The use of superficial tricks. Performances to
achieve the appearance of happiness or familial ties. Neglecting
family. Excluding others because of religious beliefs. Rituals
that have no depth or true meaning. Loneliness. Not being in
the spirit of things. Having too much to do. The Silly Season.
Scrooge mentalities that don't want to know about family and
celebrations.
Gemini 4
I saw mummy kissing Santa
Claus underneath the mistletoe
last night.
Tommie Connor
The mistletoe hung in the castle
hall,the holly-branch shone on
the old oak wall.
Thomas Haynes Bayly
The holly and the ivy
Are plants that are well known
Of all that grow in the woods
The holly bears the crown.
Anon
Love is like the wild rose-briar;
Friendship like the holly-tree.
The holly is dark when the rose-
briar blooms,But which will
bloom most constantly?
Emily Bronte
A good conscience is a
continual Christmas.
Benjamin Franklin
At Christmas play and make
good cheer,
For Christmas comes but once
a year.
ThomasTusser
Heap on the wood!
The wind is chill;
But let it whistle as it will,
We'll keep our Christmas merry
still.
SirWalter Scott

<<<PAGE 88>>>
GEMINI
T
65
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
ARADICALMAGAZINEOR
PUBLICATION,ASKINGFORACTION,
DISPLAYSASENSATIONALFRONTPAGE
Commentary: ‘A Radical Magazine or Publication’ is shown. It
is ‘Asking For Action’ and ‘Displays a Sensational Front Page’.
Sometimes, in order to be taken seriously or be noticed, people
need to do or say something rousing, radical or out of the ordinary
especially when there is a need, or a desire, to change things. There
are probably some strong feelings that ‘Action’ needs to be taken
– bear in mind, however, that the status quo can be very hard to
awaken, change or shift. As this is a ‘Radical Magazine’ it can lead to
moves that are disruptive or even threatening to stability or security
in some measure. Further, the ‘Action’ that is being called for can
leadtolessthandesirableoutcomes.Eventsthatunfoldcanbehighly
charged emotionally.
Oracle: You may be motivated for change, and getting the attention
of those around you may require radical and even abrasive action.
ThisSymbolcanequallybeseenfromtheoppositeview;perhapsyou
are having difficulty with someone who is being noisy, disruptive,
demanding or looking to cause change. Whichever, the issue is most
likely overblown and exaggerated in some way. There may be a lot
of dramatic ‘Action’ and overreaction to what is said or done. Things
may currently seem threatening, but are probably just reflections
of moments in time and likely to pass before long. Someone may
meet his or her match vocally. Attention seeking devices, such as
the ‘Sensational Front Page’ should be used very carefully and never
againstanyone.Onceeveryoneispayingattentiontheremayneedto
be an effort to publicize a more reasonable perspective. Sometimes
we overuse terms like “you never” and “that’s the last time I ever…”
It is important to get past the exaggerated ‘Sensational’ words and
look at why such large statements are thought necessary in the first
place.
Keywords: Speaking one’s mind. Messages and news that awakes or
shocks. The need for reform. Challenging outlooks. Breaking out of
constraints.Themedia.Issuesofpropaganda.Headlinesthatpromise
more than they deliver. Revolutions. Social or emotional causes.
Conspiracytheories.Printingpresses.Publishing.Publicity.Gaining
attention. Speaking one’s truth without fear of consequences.
The Caution: Being argumentative. Arousing others for selfish
reasons.Distortionsofthetruth.Misinformationanddisinformation.
Getting the whole picture wrong. Exploitation of situations.
Overstating messages. Biased information. Old and outworn
news.
Gemini 5
Controversy equalizes fools and
wise men and the fools know it.
OliverWendell Holmes
There is nothing more wonderful
than freedom of speech.
Ilya G.Ehrenburg
It is easy to believe in freedom
of speech for those with whom
we agree.
Leo McKern
My sources are unreliable,but
their information is fascinating.
Ashleigh Brilliant
Freedom of opinion can only
exist when the government
thinks itself secure.
Bertrand Russell
The sports page records
people’s accomplishments;
the front page usually records
nothing but man’s failures.
EarlWarren
All the news that’s fit to print.
Motto of the NewYorkTimes
from 1896
But words are things,And a
small drop of ink,Falling like
dew,Upon a thought,Produces
That which makes thousands,
Perhaps millions,think.
George Gordon Byron
The power of the press is very
great,but not so great as the
power of suppress.
Lord Northcliffe

<<<PAGE 89>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
66
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
WORKMEN DRILLING FOR OIL
Commentary: ‘Workmen Drilling For Oil’ is a Symbol of people
working, endeavoring to find some treasure. Often this treasure,
the ‘Oil’, is buried deep and there must be significant effort made
to bring it to the surface. Searching deeply into the depths often
carries a certain amount of risk, and the ‘Workmen’ need to have
an incentive for doing the task. ‘Drilling for Oil’’ also shows a
desire to get to the depths, or the bottom, of an issue, or to find
the rewards that exist deep within something.
Oracle: The situation facing you will probably need hard work,
concentration and commitment. The rewards you are seeking may
be hidden way beneath the surface. The answers you want are
often held within yourself, or others, and it can be just a simple
matter of having, and keeping, faith in the search. You may need
to explore your inner self for answers. Acting in cooperation with
those who have the skills to assist you in such an exploration
can bring things to the surface that you didn’t even know were
there. As true rewards are at times both difficult to find and
unsuccessful, it is through employing continual perseverance and
shying away from feelings of futility that you will find success.
You may need to get used to operating in the dark or acting
without a clear view of outcomes. Exposing yourself to risks
is often necessary in order to gain rewards or wealth. You will
need to stick with the task, whilst keeping an eye on what the
real objective is. Trust your intuition and follow your heartfelt
endeavors. Even if you don’t actually strike ‘Oil’, there can still
be much learnt during the exploration. Consider the value or the
risk in ‘Drilling’ for this potential reward. Keep a positive attitude;
perseverance and hard work will pay off in some measure.
Keywords: Pursuit of material or spiritual wealth. Ambition.
The drive to plumb the depths. Trying to get to the bottom
of things. Opportunistic attitudes. Making a fortune through
other’s resources. Psychoanalysis and psychotherapy. Dream
analysis. Explorations, past life or present. Dependence on
wealth. Research. Exploring answers. Oil and oil wells. Drills
and equipment. Searching for a reward.
The Caution: Putting a great deal of effort into risky activities
for uncertain returns. Unceasing work. Hoping to just “strike it
rich”. Neglecting friends and loved ones. Focusing too deeply on
a goal. Being opportunistic and looking for the “lucky strike”.
Relying on others to come up with the goods. Gold diggers and
opportunists. Exploiting resources. Depression. Digging into
people's private matters.
Gemini 6
In deep meditation the flow of
concentration is continuous—
like the flow of oil.
Patanjali
Few things are impossible to
diligence and skill.Great works
are performed,not by strength,
but perseverance.
Samuel Johnson
Rockefeller once explained the
secret of success.‘Get up early,
work late—and strike oil.’
Joey Adams
The weak shall inherit the earth,
but not the mineral rights.
J.Paul Getty
Of course we all have out limits,
but how can you possibly find
your boundaries unless you
explore as far and as wide as
you possibly can? I would rather
fail in an attempt at something
new and uncharted than
safely succeed in a repeat of
something I have done.
A.E.Hotchner
It is while you are patiently
toiling at the little tasks of life
that the meaning and shape of
the great whole of life dawns
on you.
Phillips Brooks
Life leaps like a geyser for those
who drill through the rock of
inertia.
Alexis Carrel

<<<PAGE 90>>>
GEMINI
T
67
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD-FASHIONED WELL WITH
THE PUREST AND COLDEST OF
WATERS
Commentary: ‘An Old-Fashioned Well With The Purest and
Coldest of Waters’ pictures a reliable, sustainable and refreshing
supplyoftheessenceofalllife—’Water’.Overtheyears,the‘Water’
from the ‘Well’ has been available to all who came to draw on it.
This ‘Well’ can supply ‘Water’ to a single person, a small family,
or a big community. ‘Wells’ symbolize sources of nourishment,
the quenching of thirst, and can also show inner wisdom, and
the depth of people, emotionally and spiritually. The people of
old saw ‘Wells’ as gateways to the spirit world where the veils
between human existence and the greater spirit became thinner,
and communications could take place with the gods and goddesses
of the nature religions. That this ‘Old Well’ has ‘The Purest and
Coldest of Waters’ shows that wisdom and nourishment has not
diminished over time. There is always a plentiful supply for those
who draw on the ‘Well’ with the right attitude and with sincerity.
Oracle: You are able to access the ‘Well’ through faith and self-
confidence and the ability to respond to others on all levels,
particularly emotionally. In order to partake of the benefits of the
‘Well’, you will need to make the effort to draw the ‘Water’ up from
the ‘Well’. There should be nothing to stop you. You probably don’t
need to employ your thoughts as much as your beliefs, compassion
andlove.Youmay,however,needalongropeandpatiencetoreach
into the depths. Imagine yourself with a big strong bucket that is
being filled with what you need. The greatest barrier to partaking
of these ‘Waters’ is to disregard the value of the ‘Well’ because it is
‘Old’ or because it is not “on tap”. Feeling like you can tap into the
essence of a person, a situation or some knowledge can be very
nourishing, rewarding and illuminating.
Keywords: Being nourished and satisfied. Feeling supported by
the environment. Clarity of thought and perception. Drawing on
deep resources. Links to the past. Deep and sustaining. Things you
can rely upon. The pool of universal experience. Oasis. Believing
in others. Ensuring water supplies. Cool, refreshing water. Plenty
for everybody.
TheCaution: Not trusting advice based on established ideas. Being
blind to the sincerity and depth of others. Judging by appearances.
Not recognizing inner values. Droughts, emotional and literal. The
well drying up, leaving nothing to nourish. Muddying of issues that
make them difficult or impossible to tap. Stagnant water. Poisons.
Moulds.
Gemini 7
Few men during their
lifetime come anywhere near
exhausting the resources
dwelling within them.There are
deep wells of strength that are
never used.
Richard E.Byrd
We never know the worth of
water till the well is dry.
English Proverb
I worked for a menial’s hire,
Only to learn,dismayed,That
any wage I had asked of Life,
Life would have gladly paid.
Jessie Rittenhouse
How many times has the water
you’re drinking been drunk
before?
Anon
American society is a sort of
flat,fresh-water pond which
absorbs silently,without
reaction,anything which is
thrown into it.
Henry Brooks Adams
And Noah he often said to his
wife when he sat down to dine,
`I don’t care where the water
goes if it doesn’t get into the
wine’.
G.K.Chesterton
I believe in getting into hot
water.I think it keeps you clean.
G.K.Chesterton

<<<PAGE 91>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
68
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AROUSED STRIKERS SURROUND A
FACTORY
Commentary: ‘Aroused Strikers Surround a Factory’, they are
obviously unhappy with their work, their pay or their conditions,
and they are now on ‘Strike’. In some measure, they are not putting
up with what they’re receiving for their efforts. For the moment,
the disagreement has stopped anyone from benefiting from
anything at all as events have come to a standstill. This Symbol
pictures a dramatic type of power struggle or disagreement over
how something of value is to be shared. It may be about work
conditions, or the distribution of wealth that results from the work
they are expected to do. What is their incentive for putting in the
effort? The ‘Strikers’ may be calm, but all hell could break loose,
turning into a full-blown demonstration with placards, yelling
and violence.
Oracle: What is really needed is a discussion of the need for one’s
rights to be heard and hopefully worked out. There is an obvious
imbalance of power and it is time to consider what negotiations
can be made. It may be difficult to find creative solutions, but
that is probably what is important now. If you are in a situation
where you have to stand up for your rights, or entitlements, or for
those of a group, you will probably need the support of others.
This could be your co-workers, friends or family. Try to enlist the
help of those who feel the same as you, but at the same time take
care to be sure that the cause is justified. There is an element of
imbalance and emotion here. Is what’s being said really being heard
by those who need to hear? Are the ‘Strikers’ asking too much?
Justice can only come through negotiation, mutual consideration
and a fair sharing of rewards. Once this is accomplished, everyone
can come back together, working towards common goals in a more
satisfying atmosphere.
Keywords: Bargaining to find more equitable solutions. Demanding
better rights and conditions. Comradeship. Disruption of the
normal flow. Not wanting to contribute or work. Taking time out
to consider one’s position. Taking action or refusing to act. Labor
strikes and strikers. Demonstrations. Peace rallies. Standing up
for others. Scab labor. Sweat shops. Slave labor. Strikes. Bosses.
Workers. Placard waving.
The Caution: Being obsessed with what is desired. Refusing any
compromises. Going without one’s due in order to protest. Being
locked out because of one’s actions or attitude. Being left out in
the street. Greedy behavior. Asking for more than one’s share.
Overworked and underpaid. Shutting down.
Gemini 8
If you want creative workers,
give them enough time to play.
John Cleese
I have long been of the
opinion that if work were
such a splendid thing the rich
would have kept more of it for
themselves.
Bruce Grocott
Man’s biggest mistake is to
believe that he’s working for
someone else.
Nashua Cavalier
Human beings are so made
that the ones who do the
crushing feel nothing;it is the
person crushed who feels what
is happening.Unless one has
placed oneself on the side of the
oppressed,to feel with them,
one cannot understand.
SimoneWeil
Strike while the iron is hot.
Traditional Proverb
It is from numberless diverse
acts of courage and belief that
human history is shaped.Each
time a man stands up for an
ideal,or acts to improve the lot
of others,or strikes out against
injustice,he sends forth a tiny
ripple of hope.
Robert F.Kennedy

<<<PAGE 92>>>
GEMINI
T
69
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MEDIEVAL ARCHER STANDS WITH
THE EASE OF ONE WHOLLY SURE
OF HIMSELF,BOW IN HAND,HIS
QUIVER FILLED WITH ARROWS
Commentary: The ‘Archer’ has ‘His Quiver Filled With Arrows’.
He is someone who is ‘Wholly Sure of Himself’, and he has his
‘Bow in Hand’. The ‘Medieval Archer’ was used in great numbers
in open battles in England. They could fire as many as fifteen
‘Arrows’ a minute. As the ‘Archer’s Quiver’ is ‘Filled with Arrows’,
it seems he may not have drawn ‘His Arrows’ yet. There may
be no immediate threat as the ‘Archer’ stands with only ‘His
Bow in Hand’. By being alert, having the ammunition he needs
can assist him to be true to himself, and with vigilance, he can
remain ‘Wholly Sure of Himself’.
Oracle: Your situation requires skill, courage, a true sense
of confidence and the knowledge to get right to the heart of
the matter facing you. You may need to examine just how
prepared you are for a surprise situation. If you have some form
of test coming up, are you armed with the knowledge and the
ammunition you need? Can you face life with calm and a quiet
assurance of the soundness of your position? Be careful not to
rush into something unprepared. It is not enough to just hope for
the best. This will only leave you feeling inadequate if you find
yourself unable to cope. If you are on “the hunt” for something,
are you prepared for the prize? Don’t be distracted or led away
from what needs to be done. Stay focused, armed and ready to
go for the objective when it presents itself. Make a strategy, and
hit the target. If you get stressed or confused, take a moment to
compose yourself and remember that you have the ammunition
of knowledge and the marksmanship that confidence and
assurance provide. Using the symbol of an ‘Arrow’, or a target,
in some way can lead to surprising results.
Keywords: Being armed and ready. Having the aim and
ammunition. Accuracy and strength. Getting to the point. The
power of tension. Sending a message true and clear. Skills that
create confidence and assurance. Focus. Bulls-eyes. Bows and
arrows. Warriors. The determination to prevail.
The Caution: Going into battle unprepared. Overconfidence
in one’s mission. Being trigger-happy. Someone “cocksure” of
themselves. Threatening postures of attack or defense. Always
being on the alert for any opportunity to fight. The thug.
Gemini 9
If you would hit the mark,
you must aim a little above it;
every arrow that flies feels the
attraction of earth.
HenryWadsworth Longfellow
Practice makes perfect.
Old Saying
You will soon break the bow if
you keep it always stretched.
Phaedrus
None learned the art of archery
from me who did not make me,
in the end,the target.
Saadi of Shiraz
Talking without thinking is like
shooting without taking aim.
Proverb
Next in importance to having a
good aim is to recognize when
to pull the trigger.
Elmer G.Letterman
An arrow shot upright falls on
the shooter’s head.
Romanian Proverb
If you shoot your arrows at
stones,you will damage them.
Austrian Proverb
Do not throw the arrow which
will return against you.
Kurdish Proverb
They couldn't hit an elephant at
this distance.
General John Sedgwick

<<<PAGE 93>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
70
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN AIRPLANE DIVES TOWARD THE
EARTH AS THOUGH FALLING
Commentary: ‘An Airplane Dives Toward the Earth as Though
Falling’ pictures risks, daring and going against the odds. The nose
‘Dive’ may look exciting, but things could really be heading for
disaster. Onlookers may be unsure of what’s really going on. Is
the pilot of this ‘Airplane’ just playing around by defying gravity
or is he really in a life-threatening situation? If the one in control,
the pilot, makes the slightest error of judgment, there could be
a terrible outcome, with the ‘Airplane’ crashing and burning. At
the right moment someone, whether it is the pilot, or someone
else who can take command, needs to pull out of the ‘Dive’ and
save the day. Everything will be fine, possibly exciting and even
exhilarating, as long as everything is truly under control.
Oracle: Are things really going the way they should? Risk taking
may pay off in a big way and may well be worth it, however, it may
end up in a self-defeating crash-and-burn situation. Are you, or is
someone else, actively working against their own best interests?
Those around you may begin to panic; it may be necessary to
reassure them that everything is going to be OK. Let go of
things that aren’t really necessary–you can’t deal with too many
things right now. It is important to try and keep distractions to a
minimum, concentrating on this situation only, and rely solely on
those you can trust. A sense of equilibrium needs to be reached
or regained. Grabbing hold of the situation and facing it with
composure and confidence can straighten things up. Imagine
yourself pulling out of a “nosedive” or repeat an affirmation of
rising up and pulling through. This is certainly a time when
courage is needed, but keep an eye on what’s developing, as
everyone may need to bail out to safety. Having a safety device,
such as a parachute or a safe landing-pad, may be necessary. The
last thing you want to do is to crash and burn.
Keywords: Plunging into situations without considering the
ramifications. Becoming conscious of what’s happening. Being
protected (and saved) at the last moment. Defying gravity. Facing
consequences. Dangerous displays. Hitting the ground running.
The art of smooth sailing. Daredevil stunts.
The Caution: Refusing to help yourself even when disaster is
imminent. Free falls and defying the consequences. Shakeups.
Things getting completely out of control. Overshooting the mark
by aiming too high. Turbulence. Reckless behavior. Neglect of
physical realities. Freaking out at crucial moments.
Gemini 10
Life changed after that jump
...I’d suddenly stepped to the
highest level of daring,a level
above even that which airplane
pilots could attain.
Charles A.Lindbergh
Later,I realized that the mission
had to end in a letdown
because the real barrier wasn’t
in the sky but in our knowledge
and experience of supersonic
flight.
ChuckYeager
Lovers of air travel find it
exhilarating to hang poised
between the illusion of
immortality and the fact of
death.
Alexander Chase
More people are killed every
year from donkeys than from
airplane crashes.
Trivia.net
A stumble may prevent a fall.
English Proverb
The airplane stays up because
it doesn’t have the time to fall.
OrvilleWright
Nothing is more desirable than
to be released from affliction,
but nothing is more frightening
than to be divested of a crutch.
James Baldwin

<<<PAGE 94>>>
GEMINI
T
71
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
NEWLY OPENED LANDS OFFER THE
PIONEER NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR
EXPERIENCE
Commentary: The ‘Pioneer’ in ‘Newly Opened Lands’ shows
someone who is ready to break away from old familiar ground
and move into unknown and more exciting territory. This new
sphere, these ‘Newly Opened Lands of New Opportunity’ are
open to ‘The Pioneer’, someone who is prepared to venture into
the unknown for the benefits that may be there. It is the ‘New
Opportunities For Experience’ that this Symbol is promising,
a chance to explore the unexplored. Fear is often the greatest
barrier to moving forward, but any fears must be put aside or faced
and the familiar must be left behind for these new possibilities
to occur.
Oracle: This situation is one that will fulfill its potential if you go
forward, leaving the past and what’s familiar behind, to seek out
potential new ‘Experiences’. Although it can take some time to
adjust to a new place or space, different customs or unfamiliar
conditions, striking out for what’s possible can be rewarding in
the long run. However, if someone is merely trying to manipulate
the world to give them exactly what they want, or are just moving
on in order to get more control, they may be sadly disappointed.
Don’t rush or expect too much but also don’t accept too little from
these ‘Newly Opened Lands’. There may be some experiences
that come your way that seem difficult, hard work or just plain
undesirable, but that is often the result of venturing into new
and unfamiliar environments. There may be a need to start life
all over again in this new ‘Newly Opened Land’. You could be
starting from scratch. Be open to whatever comes your way. Take
the time you need to adjust to this ‘New Opportunity’ and enjoy
the experience!
Keywords: Pioneering attitudes bringing rewards. Going off the
beatentrack.Comingupwithnewideas.Newspiritualrealizations
opening up vistas of hope and experiences. Opportunities to
move on to new realms. Adjusting to new places. The Promised
Lands. Being prepared to take risks. Moving out. New time zones.
Foreign customs and languages.
The Caution: Clinging to the old and familiar when it is outworn
and boring. Restricting growth and change. Not moving on.
Invading other people’s space. Claiming what’s rightfully
someone else’s. Hanging on when it’s time to let go. Running off
to avoid involvement or responsibilities.
Gemini 11
Explore thyself.Herein are
demanded the eye and the
nerve.
Henry DavidThoreau
Explorers have to be ready to
die lost.
Russell Hoban
Civilization no longer needs to
open up wilderness;it needs
wilderness to open up the still
largely unexplored human
mind.
David RainsWallace
In my writing I am acting as
a mapmaker,an explorer of
psychic areas..a cosmonaut
of inner space,and I see no
point in exploring areas that
have already been thoroughly
surveyed.
William S.Burroughs
Take a chance! All life is a
chance.The man who goes
farthest is generally the one
who is willing to do and dare.
Dale Carnegie
The Promised Land guarantees
nothing.It is only an
opportunity,not a deliverance.
Shelby Steele
In wisdom gathered over
time I have found that every
experience is a form of
exploration.
Ansel Adams

<<<PAGE 95>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
72
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BLACK SLAVE-GIRL DEMANDS
HER RIGHTS OF HER MISTRESS
Commentary: The ‘Black Slave-Girl’ who ‘Demands Her Rights
of Her Mistress’ is someone who wants to be taken seriously.
She is tired of being treated like a ‘Slave’ or dutiful underling.
Like everyone else, she has ‘Rights’ and she ‘Demands’ her
needs to be heard in order to improve her living conditions or
situation. This can be difficult for the ‘Mistress’ because it is not
uncommon for those in dominant positions to fail to understand
that everyone is entitled to their own freedoms. The ‘Mistress’
may have assumed that everything was fine, as everything was
okay at her end. Indeed, the ‘Slave-Girl’ may not have realized
that her position was something that needed changing or that
she needed liberation from, until just recently.
Oracle: If you are in a situation where you are spoken to badly, or
treated with less respect than you deserve, make a stand – don’t
just put up with it. It’s time to break the pattern and move ahead
with self-respect and self-determination. This will encourage
others to show respect and acknowledge that you should be
taken seriously. You can take responsibility for your own life and
how it is lived. Whether you are the ‘Slave-Girl' or the ‘Mistress’,
it is important now to allow some changes or adjustments to the
usual order and the established distribution of power. Nothing
stays the same in a world of such broad experiences. It is how we
react to others that measures our humanity. Parents can fall into
this 'Slave' trap and children sometimes need to show maturity
by having sympathy for the dilemma their parents face in their
own lives. State what you want clearly and simply and see how
your situation improves. Keeping quiet can lead to illness and
disgruntlement that simmers until it explodes. Whatever side of
this situation you find yourself, it’s better to act now.
Keywords:Risingaboveconditioningandlimitations.Standingup
for one’s self. Demanding better treatment. Seeking recognition
and self-respect. Being in charge of one’s life. Breaking away
from oppression. Wanting a raise in pay or conditions. The need
for freedom. Desiring property and rewards. Rising up from an
“underdog” position or situation. The quest for identity.
The Caution: Feeling hard done by. Being demanding. Blaming
others. Bucking authority. Demanding to be recognized or
noticed. Feeling used and abused. Oppression and slavery.
Jealousy and envy. Exploitation.
Gemini 12
Freedom – to walk free and own
no superior.
WaltWhitman
Freedom is the emancipation
from the arbitrary rule of other
men.
Mortimer Adler
Emancipate yourselves from
mental slavery.None but
ourselves can free our minds.
Bob Marley
Bit by bit… she had claimed
herself.Freeing yourself was one
thing;claiming ownership of
that freed self was another.
Toni Morrison
No man is good enough to
govern another man without
that other’s consent.
Abraham Lincoln
We need to find the courage to
say NO to the things and people
that are not serving us if we
want to rediscover ourselves and
live our lives with authenticity.
Barbara De Angelis
To sin by silence when they
should protest makes cowards
of men.
Abraham Lincoln
The limits of tyrants are
prescribed by the endurance
of those whom they oppose.
Frederick Douglass

<<<PAGE 96>>>
GEMINI
T
73
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WORLD FAMOUS PIANIST GIVING
A CONCERT PERFORMANCE
Commentary: ‘A World Famous Pianist’ is someone who, through
years of rigorous practice, has learnt their craft and knows how to
show it so it can be shared, enjoyed and experienced by others.
In this Symbol, the ‘Pianist’ is ‘World Famous’ and others come to
watch the ‘Concert Performance’. Perhaps he or she is performing
in some distant place or foreign land. The audience has come
to enjoy the melodies, emotions and dramas that are brought to
their ears, minds and hearts. They come to see the person who
embodies this talent. The ‘Pianist’ has the ability to concentrate
on the flow of the music and the actions of the body whilst being
attentive to the audience. Rewards always come to those who are
well rehearsed and prepared to share their talent.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the need to lay one’s talent on the line,
often in front of others, without fear of ridicule or rejection. It is
not enough for someone talented to know how wonderful they
are, the proof is in the expression of their skills in the real world,
creating something as a result. It is important to remember that
this ‘Performance’ should spring from a love of what one is doing,
whether it is music, performing, or some other type of artistic
or creative expression. However, it may be that the enjoyment
and passion has become overshadowed by the responsibility and
difficulty of having to maintain high standards. It can be difficult
to persist in practicing a learned talent if it is not a keen interest
or passion. In order to revive these feelings it may help to present
your skills, expertise and talent to others, or to the public. Know
your audience and communicate with them. Show that you are
skilled and practiced and you will earn the praise, attention and
respect of others.
Keywords: Talent. Validations of social standing. Working hard
at being special (or noticed). Reverence, respect and patronage
of the arts. Feeling attracted to those with creative ability.
Music, whether inspiring or tiring. Hands-on creativity. Feeling
empowered by ability. Success. Practice makes perfect. Singing.
Playing out front or in the band. Having an adoring public.
Repertoires. Concerts.
The Caution: Relying on past success. Not putting in the day-to-
day practice. The need for applause and acclaim to validate ones
existence. Inflated egos demanding attention. Smugness about
being talented, cultured, wealthy or privileged. Prima donnas.
Cultural rewards for the privileged few. Conceit. Nerves that can
ruin performance.
Gemini 13
The only thing that separates
successful people from the ones
who aren’t is the willingness to
work very,very hard.
Helen Gurley Brown
The deepest principle in human
nature is the craving to be
appreciated.
William James
An acre of performance is worth
a whole world of promise.
William Dean Howells
Never promise more than you
can perform.
Publilius Syrus
With man-made talent you
have to work very hard.With
God-given talent,you just touch
it up once in a while.
Pearl Bailey
There are two kinds of talents,
man-made talent and God-
given talent.The piano is
the social instrument par
excellence...drawing-room
furniture,a sign of bourgeois
prosperity,the most massive of
the devices by which the young
are tortured in the name of
education and the grown-up
in the name of entertainment.
Jacques Barzun
Please do not shoot the pianist.
He is doing his best.
OscarWilde

<<<PAGE 97>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
74
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO PEOPLE,AT WIDELY DIFFERENT
POINTS,ARE IN CONVERSATION
WITH EACH OTHER BY MEANS OF
TELEPATHY
Commentary: The ‘Two People’ are far apart – they are at ‘Widely
Different Points’. This can show that they are far apart in distance
from each other, but it can also be that they live in very separate
worlds or have very different viewpoints on life. Whatever, they
are ‘In Conversation With Each Other By Means of Telepathy’. This
Symbol embodies the idea that we are never really separate from
those with whom we truly belong, as long as we keep them in our
minds and our hearts. It is not always necessary to be physically
face-to-face with others to communicate in some manner.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that lines of communication can still be
established if you can’t be near a friend or loved one. It seems that
you have bonds with another, perhaps with many people, that are
unaffected by distance or frequency of communications or visits.
When you are unable to be together, it is possible for you to remain
connectedthroughsendingmessagesfromyourmindandheart.You
could also be feeling as though you are receiving messages from or
about them, but are afraid to pay attention to them. If you have been
receivingclairvoyantflashesorpremonitions,don’tblockthem,asitis
highlylikelythattheyaretryingtotellyousomethingworthlistening
to. Society often frowns on things concerning psychic matters; but
don’t allow yourself to submit to other people’s disapproval and
opinions. Trust your intuition, both in the sending and receiving of
messages. You may feel isolated or unable to physically bridge the
gap between yourself and someone special. Try to set aside a time
of the day or night when you can meditate on each other. Let your
heart tell you that you are always in their company and there is no
need to feel alone.
Keywords: Conquering space and time limitations. Psychic and
mental communication. Sharing and thinking the same ideas.
Knowing what is felt or thought by others. Feeling connected
regardless of physical contact. Being on the same frequency.
Mediumship. Telepathic communication. Conversation. Direct lines
of communication. Mind reading.
TheCaution: Blocking out sensitive awareness for the sake of social
needs or expectations. Mind and thought control. Manipulating by
subtle means. Losing contact. Not getting the message. Not seeing
eye-to-eye. Barging into other people’s space.
Gemini 14
I think we dream so we don’t
have to be apart so long.If we’re
in each other’s dreams,we can
be together all the time.
Hobbes
Absence makes the heart grow
fonder.
Proverb
Absence sharpens love,
presence strengthens it.
Romanian Proverb
Separation secures manifest
friendship.
Indian Proverb
Distance lends enchantment to
the view.
Thomas Campbell
I waited and waited,and,when
no message came,I knew it
must be from you.
Ashleigh Brilliant
Love does not consist in gazing
at each other,but in looking
together in the same direction.
Antoine De Saint-Exupery
To the query,“What is a
friend?”his reply was“A single
soul dwelling in two bodies.”
Aristotle
Great minds think alike.
Traditional Proverb

<<<PAGE 98>>>
GEMINI
T
75
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO DUTCH CHILDREN TALKING
AND STUDYING THEIR LESSONS
TOGETHER
Commentary: ‘Two Dutch Children Talking and Studying Their
Lessons Together’ shows the need for clarity and for those of
like mind to share and communicate spontaneous and creative
ideas. The ‘Two Dutch Children’ are discussing and sharing their
thoughts, ideas and feelings about ‘Their Lessons’. Every now and
then they are likely to bring up side issues about their personal
lives and to chatter about friends, etc. It may be that they are
meant to be only ‘Studying Their Lessons’, however they probably
have the freedom to be able to relax and take things easily. The
people around them probably won’t be interested in what they
are ‘Studying’, although they may sometimes pretend to be. Some
may feel left out because the level of conversation or the ways
of communicating are so carefree, in-depth or inaccessible to
others’ minds.
Oracle: This Symbol shows people enjoying each other and
sharing common goals. When a lot of the confusion of the day-
to-day life is put aside, there can be an understanding of each
other or those around you that is so strong it can feel like a soul
connection. As these are said to be ‘Dutch Children’, feeling cut
off and isolated because of language or cultural separations can
be frustrating, but if you have companionship with someone on
your wavelength, it is much easier to bear. You should be able to
relax and feel comfortable with your associates. Try not to look
for or create any unnecessary complications. Get on with your
job quietly and effectively with company that seeks the same
things in life. Getting a grip on life’s ‘Lessons’ will enlighten
and enrich everyone in this situation. Finding a friend to learn
and be creative with could lead to some valuable lessons about
friendships, relating and the world.
Keywords: Sharing of innocence and carefree thoughts and
ideals. Exchanging views with like-minded individuals. Simplicity.
Sense of companionship. Communication. Best friends. Having
the right teacher. Learning and studying. Conversations that
illuminate issues. Speaking many languages. Gossiping.
The Caution: Failing to communicate in depth. Unsophisticated
viewpoints. Excluding others as “unworthy”. Societal or racial
prejudice. “Hearing voices” that don’t make sense. Not hearing the
opinions of others to further understand how the world works.
Foreign languages that exclude others.
Gemini 15
The language of friendship is
not words but meanings.
Henry DavidThoreau
Friendship is a single soul
dwelling in two bodies.
Aristotle
A friend is a present you give to
yourself.
Robert Louis Stevenson
The pleasure of reading is
doubled when one lives with
another who shares the same
books.
Katherine Mansfield
Whenever two good people
argue over principles,both are
always right.
Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach
A different language is a
different version of life.
Federico Fellini
I had no idea what I wanted to
do with my life,so nothing of
what I was studying seemed
to fit.I know now that I should
have taken advantage of that
time and that I missed a great
deal of the opportunity to
educate myself.
Harrison Ford
In studying the way,realizing it
is hard;once you have realized
it,preserving it is hard.When
you can preserve it,putting it
into practice is hard.
Zen Proverb

<<<PAGE 99>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
76
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN ACTIVIST ON A
PLATFORM IN AN EMOTIONAL
SPEECH DRAMATIZING HER CAUSE
Commentary: ‘A Woman Activist’ is ‘On a Platform Dramatizing
Her Cause’. There is a ‘Platform’, that she is standing on and a
message that she wants others to hear and understand. Although
she stands up for what she feels, she may strike resistance. She
may feel misunderstood and disadvantaged simply because of her
gender, status or experience. This may be due to the ignorance
of others but she must press her case or the status quo will
remain.
Oracle: There’s something that must be said or announced. If the
cause is worthy or timely and your communications are clear, you
will be heard by those who resonate with your message and your
influence will spread. Think things through before speaking and
the message will be a whole lot clearer. If emotions or energies
get out of control it can lead to hysterics and tantrums. People are
likely to switch off in some way. Similarly, when someone is saying
something somewhat confronting it is likely to arouse people’s
emotions, or it can literally get their physical bodies responding
– by moving about and fidgeting. What’s being expressed may
be too emotional and dramatic for some, but this may be what
is necessary to shift stubbornness or to wake people up. This
situation is quite possibly about inequality and the efforts that
will need to be taken to find a fairer outcome, sometimes for
many people. Who is listening and who is not? Are those who are
not listening creating frustration? Is this causing a disturbance?
Everyone making an effort to listen and show kindness and
patience may solve any problems.
Keywords: Stating one’s case. Revealing social passions. Being a
mouthpiece for the emotions of the collective. The desire to be
heard. Having a platform or stage. The need for rational emotional
points to be made. Being the “underdog”. Many things running
through the mind. The battle between the masculine and the
feminine. Taking it to the streets. Announcements. Fighting for
a cause. Having to shoulder too many things.
The Caution: Pressing opinions on the unwilling and
disinterested. Feeling that no one listens or cares. Rational or
political structures overriding one’s life. Going over the top
trying to get a message across. Feeling like the “woman”who
is never listened to. Controlling the agenda. Hormonal swings.
Male chauvinism blocking female progress. Justifying ones self.
Silly ideas.
Gemini 16
All progress has resulted from
people who took unpopular
positions.
Adlai Stevenson
A free society is a place where
it’s safe to be unpopular.
Adlai Stevenson
It is always brave to say what
everyone thinks.
Georges Duhamel
To sin by silence when they
should protest makes cowards
of men.
Abraham Lincoln
The last struggle for our rights,
the battle for our civilization is
entirely with ourselves.
WilliamWells Brown
Violence in the voice is often
only the death rattle of reason
in the throat.
John F.Boyes
Cautious,careful people,always
casting about to preserve their
reputations ...can never affect
a reform.
Susan B.Anthony
A sufficient measure of
civilization is the influence of
good women.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Revolution is not a dinner party.
Maotse-Tung

<<<PAGE 100>>>
GEMINI
T
77
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Gemini 17
To live lightheartedly but
not recklessly;to be gay
without being boisterous;to
be courageous without being
bold;to show trust and cheerful
resignation without fatalism—
this is the art of living.
Jean de La Fontaine
But I was so much older then;
I’m younger than that now.
Bob Dylan
If youth but had the knowledge
and old age the strength.
French Proverb
I’m aiming by the time I’m fifty
to stop being an adolescent.
Wendy Cope
If youth knew;if age could.
Henri Estienne
You’re only young once,but you
can be immature forever.
John Greier
Be wise with speed,for a youth
at 40 is a fool indeed.
EdwardYoung
Don’t trust anyone over 30 who
used to say“Don’t trust anyone
over 30”.
Anon
The trick is growing up without
growing old.
Casey Stengel
Stupid is forever.
Anon
THE HEAD OF A ROBUST YOUTH
CHANGES INTO THAT OF A MATURE
THINKER
Commentary: ‘The Head of a Robust Youth Changes Into That of
a Mature Thinker’ shows that the young male energy in us has to
grow up sooner or later. The various stages of life’s experience
are often marked by the changing appearance of our face as we
age and the lines and gray hair appear. Life can only be lived
in the fast lane for so long. It may have been appropriate to be
somewhat young and reckless, but now it is time to stop “tearing
around”, to be more responsive to life and aware of its limitations
and the consequences of one’s actions. Growing up and taking
a more ‘Mature’ attitude will bring a new understanding of the
world and how it works.
Oracle: Regardless of age, it’s time for a more ‘Mature’ attitude.
The old ways of solving things will no longer work because this
situation requires a more mature response, which will lead to
another level of wisdom. There is only so much that one can
do with youthful force – now it’s time to use your intuition
and intellect. Look to what’s being learnt and allow wisdom to
shine through. Even though there may be some level of pain in
adjusting to a life with more responsibilities, let the situation help
bring about any necessary changes, even if they are hard to bear
at first. Once we mature in life it is rare to go backwards. Feel
and acknowledge the ‘Youthful’ mindset that is now changing,
evolving and growing. Think things through and look to the
consequences of your actions. More respect will, or at least
should, be shown towards people as they ‘Mature’ and take on
a more thinking attitude. Getting to know yourself and your
responses to the environment will produce a more ‘Mature’,
grounded and empowered you.
Keywords: Thinking with the higher mind. Gaining maturity.
Making wise decisions. Using the system to get what one wants.
Growing up “overnight”. Having to change whether one likes it
or not. Learning the lessons that come with age. Initiations into
adulthood. Life changing events. Thinking, pondering. Finding
a state of calm. Refined thinking. Facing reality.
The Caution: Suddenly becoming old. Losing innocence and
energy. Clinging to the illusions of childhood. Peter-Pan attitudes.
“Never growing up”. Feeling old when one could, or should, be
feeling young. Hormones taking over and dictating behavior.
Reacting with the lower emotional nature. Forever adolescent.

<<<PAGE 101>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
78
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO CHINESE MEN TALKING
CHINESE IN A WESTERN CROWD
Commentary: The ‘Two Chinese Men’ are ‘Talking Chinese in a
Western Crowd’. Even though these ‘Chinese Men’ may be able
to speak English very well, it may not necessarily be their native
tongue or their preferred language. In a ‘Western Crowd’ they
are foreigners. However, as there are ‘Two’ of them, they have
somebody that shares a common language, thoughts and ideas,
and they may feel totally at home. This Symbol shows that even
in complex groups there is an attraction toward people who have
cultural or mindset similarities to ours. This could be about looks,
nationality, ideas, language or even social status.
Oracle: No matter how adept one is at learning the ways of
different people, there is still much greater ease and comfort
in speaking our native tongue or speaking a language that more
truly reflects our attitudes and beliefs. By finding someone of like
mind we can feel more comfortable and secure. Sharing mutual
thoughts can transcend feelings of alienation and lead to new
understanding. It can, however, be frustrating and confusing to
be in a situation where few can understand what someone is
saying and thinking. Misunderstandings sometimes occur when
we hear a few isolated words and don't get the true picture of
what’s actually really being said. This can be even worse if there
is also some level of prejudice or criticism shown towards you or
others. There is a need to not judge others just because they are
different from one's self. If there’s a feeling of not quite fitting
in, don’t be concerned – someone will turn up to share your
experience. Indeed, there can be a strong feeling that there is
only one other person, or very few special people, with whom
you can share thoughts, plans and ideas. Having someone you
can communicate with on the same level will dispel any feelings
of alienation.
Keywords: Finding those of like mind. Leaving the “western
crowd” behind. People having a specialized language that
doesn’t communicate with the larger population. Exclusivity in
communication. Interpreting or misinterpreting tones of voice.
People being drawn to each other. “Chinese whispers”.
The Caution: Reluctance to adapt. Being with people who
don’t share the same philosophies or understandings. No one
to communicate with on the same level. Stories that get out of
control. Depending on others to mirror one’s self. Being in alien
territory. Schizophrenia. Hearing voices. Racism.
Gemini 18
The time to stop talking is when
the other person nods his head
affirmatively but says nothing.
Anon
It was Greek to me.
William Shakespeare
What a delightful thing is the
conversation of specialists! One
understands absolutely nothing
and it’s charming.
Edgar Degas
I believe they talked of me,
for they laughed consumedly.
George Farquhar
A thousand cups of wine do not
suffice when true friends meet,
but half a sentence is too much
when there is no meeting of
minds.
Chinese Proverb
I was recently on a tour of Latin
America,and the only regret
I have was that I didn’t study
Latin harder in school so I could
converse with those people.
Dan Quayle
A different language is a
different vision of life.
Federico Fellini
Great minds think alike.
Traditional Proverb
I speak Esperanto like a native.
Spike Milligan

<<<PAGE 102>>>
GEMINI
T
79
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN A MUSEUM A LARGE ARCHAIC
VOLUME REVEALS A TRADITIONAL
WISDOM
Commentary: The ‘Large Archaic Volume Reveals a Traditional
Wisdom’. It is in a ‘Museum’ where it is safe and secure, and
available to all who pass by and appreciate it. ‘Traditional Wisdom’
is nowadays often taken for granted or ignored. In this Symbol
this ‘Wisdom’ is locked away in a ‘Museum’ like some kind of
curiosity that is somehow revered, but possibly no longer relevant.
The ‘Museum’ may literally be a building, but it may also be
information or knowledge hidden deep within yourself or the
elders of your community. This ‘Wisdom’ is held within all of us
and needs to be tapped to be truly understood.
Oracle: Some effort needs to be made to discover this ‘Large
Archaic Volume’ and to allow the ‘Traditional Wisdom’ within
it to inspire your actions in present-day situations. You may
experience intuitive ‘Wisdom’ that seems to be generated outside
your own experience. In a progressive world we look so often
for new ideas and new solutions. ‘Traditional’ knowledge can
seem to be irrelevant to the present, but in truth it is something
we often need in our lives. The knowledge behind those beliefs
or rituals can be as relevant today as it has always been. Reading
and studying this ‘Archaic Wisdom’ can bring a sense of pride
in our ancestors and those that went before us. It is, however,
often important to update the way we view and use 'Traditional
Wisdom'. This may be what is needed in this situation. Confidence
in your actions will come from foundations that have a history or
a strong sense of the past. Learn to take the best from the past,
as it is useful for providing answers and clues to modern life
problems. However, let go of any old and outworn beliefs that
are holding you back.
Keywords: Reading and learning. Collective knowledge coming
from ancient sources. Enormous potential to be tapped. The
Akashic records. Astrology. The Bible. Learning from the victories
and mistakes of the past. Old stories that come out of the past or
are hard to forget. Shamanic knowledge. Learning from heritage.
The roots of civilization. Books. Ancient sources of information.
The mysteries. Being in the public domain.
The Caution: Not understanding wise messages or advice. Being
caught up in accepting only what tradition dictates. Old fashioned
rules of “the book”. Old and outdated laws.
Gemini 19
The books we read should be
chosen with great care,that
they may be,as an Egyptian
king wrote over his library,“The
medicines of the soul.”
Paxton Hood
To me the charm of an
encyclopedia is that it knows
and I needn’t.
FrancisYeats Brown
The Bible remained for me a
book of books,still divine—but
divine in the sense that all great
books are divine which teach
men how to live righteously.
Sir Arthur Keith
There are worse crimes than
burning books.One of them is
not reading them.
Joseph Brodsky
The worst thing about new
books is that they keep us from
reading the old ones.
Joseph Joubert
In science,read by preference
the newest works.In literature,
read the oldest.The classics are
always modern.
Lord Edward Lytton
Books are the carriers of
civilization.Without books,
history is silent,literature dumb,
science crippled,thought and
speculation at a standstill.
BarbaraTuchman

<<<PAGE 103>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
80
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CAFETERIA WITH AN ABUNDANCE
OF CHOICES
Commentary: ‘A Cafeteria’ is shown which has ‘an Abundance
of Choices’. We are very lucky in this modern age that everything
is laid out for us so easily and so temptingly. There are all sorts
of foods available, and we have only to reach out and take them.
There are sometimes so many choices that it can be hard to
make up one’s mind. Also, each has its price. The ‘Cafeteria’
is different from the a-la-carte restaurant–everything that is on
display is available instantly. This can mean that what is available
is not necessarily the best quality, but it is ready for use and
consumption straight away. There is no time lost in preparing
food—it’s all there in front of you.
Oracle: Although everything looks so near and so convenient, be
careful of your choices. Each will nourish you and fill you up to
some extent, but some things are more nourishing or beneficial
than others. Some things are downright bad for your health and
should be avoided like the plague! However, we have a lot of free
choice in our modern society; if you don’t like your first choice,
you can go back for something else – that is, if you can afford
it. This Symbol is telling you that you may not need the special
a-la-carte options of life right now. There are plenty of things
immediately available that will do just fine. In fact you probably
don’t have the time or the opportunity to be too fussy. You may
have to just take advantage of what is available. Take what you
need, use it quickly and effectively so that you can clear those
issues and get on with the more difficult situations later when
there is time for more planning and patience.
Keywords: Overwhelming alternatives in modern society.
Satiation. Everything provided for. Self-service. Issues of
indulgence and one’s needs satisfied. Salivating over what’s on
display. The incredible number of “choices” in a technological
society. Too many choices (food, lovers, jobs, opportunities) – so
little time. Instant gratification. Takeaway food. Buffet-style meals.
Obesity. Chef’s surprises. The need to be discerning. Mechanized
systems that don’t require much thought.
The Caution: Taking everything you can simply because it
is available, regardless of needs. The inability to make life’s
decisions. Things so near, yet so far. The inability to satisfy no
matter how much one has. Feeling that one has to eat because it’s
there. Indulgence beyond reason. Indigestion. Waste. Obsession
with food. Using up people one by one.
Gemini 20
The whole world is our dining
room,but be careful:it is also
our garbage can.
Ashleigh Brilliant
There are people who so
arrange their lives as to only
feed themselves on side dishes.
Ortegy y Gassett
He looked at me as if I was a
side dish he hadn’t ordered.
Ring Lardner
At a dinner party one should
eat wisely but not too well,and
talk well but not too wisely.
William Somerset Maugham
It is not enough to offer a
smorgasbord of courses.We
must insure that students are
not just eating at one end of the
table.
A.Bartlett Giamatti
Appetite comes with eating;
the more one has,the more one
would have.
French Proverb
There are many of us who
cannot but feel dismal about
the future of various cultures.
Often it is hard not to agree
that we are becoming culinary
nitwits,dependent upon fast
foods and mass kitchens and
megavitamins for our basically
rotten nourishment.
M.F.K.Fisher

<<<PAGE 104>>>
GEMINI
T
81
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A TUMULTUOUS LABOR
DEMONSTRATION
Commentary: ‘A Tumultuous Labor Demonstration’ is shown. It
seems there are many people who are unhappy and who feel that
they are not getting their fair share. ‘Labor Demonstrations’ can
cause work to come to a standstill as people make their point.
There is an injustice that needs righting and a spontaneous group
reaction may be what is needed to wake up those in charge.
Sometimes there’s a need to lift one’s voice or make a huge fuss
otherwise nothing will be done; things are not likely to change by
themselves. Sometimes it is only by rallying many people together
in a common cause that you can be heard, or be taken seriously.
Indeed, grinding things to a halt may be the appropriate thing
to do at this time.
Oracle: This Symbol is suggesting that there are probably others
who are involved or sympathetic to your situation. However, if
there is a feeling of being alone and powerless, it is important to
find out what level of support you actually have. Responses to
this situation can cause emotions, and therefore actions, to get
out of control. On the other hand, if you are the one trying to
take advantage of someone else because you think they haven’t
got the power to defy you, you may be unleashing a reaction that
will involve many other people. Whatever the situation, never
underestimate the power of the collective, whether the people be
blue collar or corporate. Indeed, the level of one’s status plays a
somewhat diminished role when it comes to the power and might
of the majority. It is important to speak up for your rights and
when the issues are important there is good reason to seek out
support. You will be surprised how much support for the cause is
out there. Stand up for what you want and see what happens.
Keywords: Pushing for change to the status quo. Feeling hard
done by or taken advantage of. Seeking a better share of the
profits. Protest about having too much to do. Standing up for
yourself. Issues being trivialized. Overreaction. Melodramatic
approaches to serious issues. Voting for change. Periodic blowing
up. The rights of democracy. People in the street. Peace rallies.
The Caution: Using the group to accomplish a personal agenda.
Asking for more than one’s share, or not being able to ask for one’s
share. Protests that can lead to riots. Resisting change. Feeling that
one’s vote or voice doesn’t count. Emotions that get completely
out of hand. Refusing to cooperate or to be productive. Brutality
and violence.
Gemini 21
A riot is the language of the
unheard.
Martin Luther King Jr
We are all in this together,by
ourselves.
LilyTomlin
In union there is strength.
Aesop
Whenever you find yourself on
the side of the majority,it’s time
to pause and reflect.
MarkTwain
If we don’t stand for something,
we may fall for anything.
Malcolm X
We are one,our cause is one,
and we must help each other if
we are to succeed.
Frederick Douglass
Those who sit at the feast will
continue to enjoy themselves
even though the veil that
separates them from the world
of toiling reality below has been
lifted by mass revolts and critics.
Mary Ritter Beard
We must develop huge
demonstrations because the
world is used to big dramatic
affairs.They think in terms of
hundreds and millions and
billions.… billions of dollars are
appropriated at the twinkling
of an eye.Nothing little counts.
A.Philip Randolph

<<<PAGE 105>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
82
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DANCING COUPLES CROWD THE
BARN IN A HARVEST FESTIVAL
Commentary: ‘Dancing Couples Crowd the Barn in a Harvest
Festival’. Successful achievements have been accomplished, such
as the ‘Harvest’, and efforts have come to a fruitful conclusion
and now it is time to gather together with others to celebrate.
Everyone should share the pleasure that comes from a successful
‘Harvest’. The hard work is put behind them and they reap the
rewards of the benefits available to them in their leisure time.
As ‘The Barn’ is ‘Crowded’, many people from the community
come together to enjoy each other, the music and to dance. By
gathering together and celebrating, a sense of community spirit
can develop where there is always something worthwhile to be
celebrated, even if it is not your own success.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the need to be in tune with seasonal
rhythms and the natural flow of life. The ‘Harvest’ may mean
many things. It can be the actual bringing in of a ‘Harvest’,
the birth of a baby, the first performance at school, a religious
ceremony, such as a communion or bar mitzvah, or a job well
done. It is wonderful when people come together and warmly
and sincerely congratulate someone who has good news without
nagging feelings of jealousy or resentment. There is a need to
get back to a simpler, conservative level of enjoyment where
each and every person’s achievement is everybody’s pleasure.
This can lead to an increased understanding and concern for
the individuals within our community. It is also possible for one
person’s pain to become everyone’s care. Whatever, the feeling
of a healthy heart and a healthy mind, while taking a break from
the struggles of providing, is what gives us the strength for the
battles of life. Perhaps it’s time to kick up your heels and dance.
See if you can take some time out to enjoy your environment,
the gifts of nature and the people around you.
Keywords: Celebrating the warmth and providence of the earth.
The joy of nature’s harvest. Joining with others to celebrate. The
reality of rhythmical or seasonal adjustments. Agriculture. Good
old time values. Issues of pride in one’s place. Going out, having
fun, listening and dancing to music. Square dancing, ballroom
dancing etc. Barns and dance halls.
TheCaution: Being the wallflower and not participating. Waiting
for a special invitation rather than responding to the possibilities
available. Resentment. Isolation. Going alone. False displays of
community. Shallowness. Attention paid to only those who are
important.
Gemini 22
The one thing that can solve
most of our problems is dancing.
James Brown
Wives are people who feel they
don’t dance enough.
Groucho Marx
If in February there be no rain,‘tis
neight good for hay nor grain.
Proverb
Not what we have but what
we enjoy constitutes our
abundance.
John Petit-Senn
Plant a kernel of wheat and you
reap a pint;plant a pint and you
reap a bushel.Always the law
works to give you back more
than you give.
Anthony Norvell
Earth is here so kind,that just
tickle her with a hoe and she
laughs with a harvest.
Douglas Jerrold
Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaketh.
Romanian Proverb
Take rest;a field that has rested
gives a bountiful crop.
Ovid
Most of us spend the first six
days of each week sowing wild
oats;then we go to church on
Sunday and pray for a crop
failure.
Fred Allen

<<<PAGE 106>>>
GEMINI
T
83
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THREE FLEDGLINGS IN A NEST HIGH
UP IN A TREE
Commentary: The ‘Fledglings in the Nest’ are not yet able to fly
properly as they haven’t developed the feathers for flying. They
are in their ‘Nest High Up in a Tree’. The ‘Three Fledglings’ should
feel warm and supported in their ‘Nest’ and safe and at home in
their environment. Although there is sometimes a feeling of being
left alone and neglected, there is, hopefully, still a sense of safety
in their isolation. This reflects a time of dependency on others to
provide food and shelter. It may be too soon for them to move out on
their own, but, after more nourishment, their time will come.
Oracle: The situation facing you is full of promise for the future.
The ‘Fledglings’ are not yet ready to fly and are still in need of
the “mother” to sustain, protect, nourish and educate them. The
universe flows in a pattern, and this pattern includes taking time
to grow, mature and learn how to fly off into our own lives under
our own steam. This period in the ‘Nest’ gives us a time to be
dependant and nurtured. Knowing that you will be able to rise up
on your own and leave the security and safety of the ‘Nest’ is the
motivation to focus on whilst growing and developing your inner
self. There may be a need to resist feelings of frustration. Arguments
and contests with siblings can arise, especially if you feel “cooped
up” together. Perhaps you have to stay when you really would prefer
to leave because of others you may feel somewhat responsible
for. Perhaps there would be more room available for everyone if
someone left the ‘Nest’. Whether you are one of the ‘Fledglings’
or one of the “parents" who have to protect and nurture, don’t
worry—your opportunity for independence and free flight will
come. Integration of spirit, soul and body will lead to you being
able to fly on one’s own in good time.
Keywords: Discovering a whole new sense of being. Teaching.
Safety. Living in small spaces. Wanting room to move. Privacy.
Staying in the ‘Nest’ versus leaving it. Resisting change. Providing
room and board for others. Sharing flats and houses. The battle for
survival. Being different, therefore breaking the mold. Brothers and
sisters. Expecting to be looked after and fed. Growing spirituality.
Sibling rivalry.
TheCaution: Wanting to leave home before one’s ready. Wondering
if one’s needs will be met. Arguments about the pecking order.
Psychologicalimmaturity.Feelingdependentonexternalinfluences
for survival. Feeling trapped by circumstance. Insecurity. Feeling
exposed to danger. Codependence. Not knowing or realizing one’s
place. Falling out. Bickering over space.
Gemini 23
The greatest gifts you can give
your children are the roots of
responsibility and the wings of
independence.
DenisWaitley
What a cunning mixture of
sentiment,pity,tenderness and
irony surrounds adolescence,
what knowing watchfulness!
Young birds on their first flight
are hardly so hovered around.
Georges Bernanos
In a broken nest there are few
whole eggs.
Chinese Proverb
Birds in their little nest agree;
and‘tis a shameful sight,when
children of one family fall out,
and chide,and fight.
IsaacWatts
God stirs up our comfortable
nests and pushes us over the
edge of them,and we are
forced to use our wings to save
ourselves from fatal falling.
Read your trials in this light,
and see if your wings are being
developed.
HannahWhitall Smith
The mother eagle teaches her
little ones to fly by making
their nest so uncomfortable
that they are forced to leave it
and commit themselves to the
unknown world of air outside.
And just so does our God to us.
HannahWhitall Smith

<<<PAGE 107>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
84
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CAREFREE CHILDREN SKATING ON
ICE
Commentary: ‘Carefree Children Skating on Ice’ symbolizes the
freedom and pleasure of ‘Children’ enjoying themselves outdoors,
even though it’s winter and cold outside. It also reflects the general
lack of concern they have for issues of personal danger. ‘Children’
learn at an early age to ‘Skate’ over difficulties. Being ‘Carefree’ and
unconcerned, they will often take risks when they play, unaware of
thetruerealitiesandpossibledangersinlife.Theykeep‘Skating’and
playing, but need to be carefully aware of what’s going on around
them; otherwise the game could fall apart. There is the possibility
of losing the pleasure they are experiencing as cracks form in the
‘Ice’—their joy and pleasure becomes more risky.
Oracle: If your situation is “on thin ice” it may be challenging, but it
maybethatmostofthechallengecomesfromthefearsandconcerns
that adulthood brings. Sharpen up your senses and your reflexes
so that you can cope with any sudden surprises. Even if you have
a positive attitude you may sense that everything could collapse at
any moment. Listen for subtle changes in the environment that tell
you whether you are still “safe” in your surroundings. If you don’t
acknowledge these fears and adjust yourself accordingly, then you
may be put at a disadvantage. Perhaps an avenue of escape should be
set up in case cracks in the ‘Ice’ start to appear. Dangerous situations
can lead to a heightened sense of awareness and fun, but how long
can one feel safe taking such risks? Sooner or later the cracks will
widen. What will happen then? Similar to the ‘Children’, you may
notevenbeawareoftheriskinyoursituation.Bewarynottoblindly
rushintoanything,asyoumaygettothepointwhereyoucan’tsafely
return to where you began. Watch out for the weak spots and listen
carefully for clues to how to maneuver through difficulties.
Keywords: Getting around difficult situations by making the most
of them (or evading them). Skating over problems. Finding creative
and childlike solutions. Testing the boundaries. Considering
consequences. Tiptoeing around problems with family. Responding
quickly to every type of situation. Knowing how to maneuver tight
situations. Observing one’s center of gravity. Being keenly aware.
Testing the waters. Being alert.
TheCaution: Rushing before checking that it is safe to do so. Living
for momentary pleasures, without thought of ramifications. Getting
away with things through acting naively and childishly. Taking risks
that put others lives on the line. Going too far too fast. Lack of warm
clothing. Frozen atmospheres.
Gemini 24
The thinner the ice,the more
anxious is everyone to see
whether it will bear.
Josh Billings
Children are curious and are risk
takers.They have lots of courage.
They venture out into a world
that is immense and dangerous.
A child initially trusts life and the
processes of life.
John Bradshaw
A man learns to skate by
staggering about making a fool
of himself;indeed,he progresses
in all things by making a fool of
himself.
George Bernard Shaw
In skating over thin ice,our
safety is in our speed.
RalphWaldo Emerson
I don’t remember the first time
I skated on ice,I was too young.
I do remember falling in love
with that wind-in-my-face
feeling while speed skating.
Bonnie Blair
We live amid surfaces,and the
true art is to skate well on them.
RalphWaldo Emerson
In the depth of winter I finally
learned that there was in me an
invincible summer.
Albert Camus

<<<PAGE 108>>>
GEMINI
T
85
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GARDENER TRIMMING LARGE
PALM TREES
Commentary: ‘A Gardener Trimming’ shows someone clipping
dead fronds off ‘Large Palm Trees’. He is working at getting rid
of the old foliage that looks messy and unkempt. His job is to
take notice of the things that other people may find irritating or
cluttering, but don’t have the time or the tools to take care of
themselves. By ‘Trimming’ the lower fronds from the ‘Palm Trees’,
he reveals their beauty more and more as he works.
Oracle: This Symbol shows a clearing away of the evidence of
the past in order to give a fresh, clean image. There may need
to be a special effort to make your creations or situations looks
their best. But how much of your work only ends up making little
difference to the overall picture? Sometimes we like to have our
past experiences on display, be they good or bad. This can elicit
admiration or, sometimes, sympathy. The truth about your life,
however, is gained from what you have learnt and how it is taking
you forward. ‘Palm Trees’ always grow from the top of the head,
from their crown. If you cut the crown out of a ‘Palm’ it will
die. The same applies to us. It is important to let the powerful
energies within rise up and grow toward the heavens. What is
past is past and once it has revealed its purpose, it is time to
carefully and lovingly ‘Trim’ any unnecessary elements away. It
may certainly feel as though you are leaving yourself open and
without protection from the lower, basic elements, but every
now and then the ‘Gardener’ has to do his job. There is a time
when our past does indeed create some protection, and there is
a time when we must listen to our intuition and know when it
is time to let go. Learn what to say and when, and also what is,
and what isn’t important.
Keywords: Trimming off nonessentials to get to the bare reality.
Caring for one’s possessions. Doing the work simply because
it needs to be done. Getting rid of rubbish. Gardening and
landscaping. Editing words, thoughts, emotions – superfluous
things. Weeding out the unnecessary. Looking after cosmetic
appearances. Tidying up. Tools. Trips to the dump.
The Caution: Doing the work because of routine, rather than
need. Spending time doing things because of appearances.
Neglecting the real issues at hand, which may include good
nourishment, watering, and caring for physical realities. Doing
menial jobs when one could be doing much bigger better ones.
Not knowing when to stop. Leaving a mess.
Gemini 25
Good thoughts bear good fruit,
bad thoughts bear bad fruit—
and man is his own gardener.
James Allen
Gather the flowers,but spare
the buds.
Andrew Marvell
Choosing goals that are
important to you is one of the
most essential things you can
do in order to live your dreams.
Les Brown
And add to these retired leisure,
that in trim gardens takes his
pleasure.
John Milton
‘Tis in ourselves that we are
thus or thus.Our bodies are our
gardens to which our wills are
gardeners.
William Shakespeare
Besides the noble art of
getting things done,there is
the noble art of leaving things
undone.The wisdom of life
consists in the elimination of
nonessentials.
LinYu-t’ang
If I write four words,I shall strike
out three.
Anon

<<<PAGE 109>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
86
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
WINTER FROST IN THE WOODS
Commentary: ‘Winter Frost in the Woods’ shows things being
in a dormant stage. In the woods, winter is a time when energy
is being used to reinforce the roots, to strengthen the support
system and to build up the nourishment that’s needed for the
coming seasonal growth and the fruits of spring and summer.
There is no point trying to force growth now, it is not possible,
nor is it useful. This is not to say that this is not a valuable time.
It is. It can be very easy to lose sight of the importance of each
“season”.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, it may be wise to prepare
for more vibrant and expansive times by using this period to
ensure that you get rest and recharge your batteries – on every
level. Plans you’ve got for accomplishing things now may not
work. There may be delays, equipment failures, etc. This can be
frustrating. This Symbol says three things: there has been a time
of fruitfulness which has passed; this is a time of withdrawal
and inner growth; and that a time of new beginnings or fresh
developments is surely coming. Patience is needed for the time
being. The ‘Frost’ slows everything down as the temperature
drops. Emotions can become dull and you may feel less responsive
and decisions may be difficult to make because the future seems
less certain. You may feel sluggish or find it difficult to get going
because your emotions or your body are in need of a recharge.
Use this time to make plans for the future and to test possibilities.
It is a good time to pull back and observe how others are coping
and consider how to help them or have them help you. Imagine
spring coming, with all its warmth and growth – this will give
you a sense of hope and confidence in the future.
Keywords: The calm before the dawn. The silence inherent in
cold, barren times. Barren and cold feelings. Refrigeration and
freezing. Serenity. Surviving cold conditions. Feeling like one’s on
the outside. Being lost in the wilderness. Beautiful surrounds. Lack
of fertility. Things freezing up. The need to rug up. Hibernation.
Icicles. Battling through hard times. Depression. Growth that is
halted or held up. The inevitability of chage.
The Caution: Denying the natural flow of the season by trying to
rush things. Feeling “frozen out”, lost and neglected. Feeling dead
lost and buried. Chills in the air. Keeping one’s feelings on ice.
Immobility. Not knowing where to find warmth or nourishment.
Losing faith. Infertility. Frigid responses. Stagnation. Loss of love
and light. Stunted growth.
Gemini 26
Lord,how the day passes! It is
like a life,so quickly when we
don’t watch it,and so slowly if
we do.
John Steinbeck
No winter lasts forever;no
spring skips its turn.
Hal Borland
If we had no winter,the spring
would not be so pleasant,if
we did not sometimes taste of
adversity,prosperity would not
be so welcome.
Anne Bradstreet
I prefer winter and fall,when
you feel the bone structure of
the landscape—the loneliness
of it—the dead feeling of
winter.Something waits
beneath it-the whole story
doesn’t show.
AndrewWyeth
Let us learn to appreciate there
will be times when the trees will
be bare,and look forward to
the time when we may pick the
fruit.
Anton Chekhov
Let us love winter,
for it is the spring of genius.
Pietro Aretino
Therefore my age is as a lusty
winter,frosty,but kindly.
William Shakespeare

<<<PAGE 110>>>
GEMINI
T
87
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A YOUNG GYPSY EMERGING FROM
THE WOODS GAZES AT FAR CITIES
Commentary: ‘A Young Gypsy Emerging From the Woods Gazes
at Far Cities’ shows someone who is preparing to leave their home,
their family and what is familiar to them and move out into a new
world. Only so much can be achieved living in the ‘Woods’ and
there’s the need, or the desire, to move to ‘Far Cities’. The ‘Gypsy’
is somehow “different”, having things about their background or
upbringing that have kept them away from the mainstream. The
‘Gypsy’ also brings to mind music, dancing, the gift of prophecy
and a sense of the vibrancy and joy of life.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the desire to attempt or achieve
something that currently seems out of your reach or distant in
some way. You may be trying to participate with others or in a
new arena of life or work, and finding it difficult because you don’t
command enough acceptance or respect. If you have to deal with
rejection, dust yourself off and take another stab at it. A positive
side of this Symbol is that an “outsider”, or someone alien to a
situation, can bring new qualities to the establishment; things that
the conservatives may never have thought of, or tried. With this
‘Emergence’, it is possible that you may not feel comfortable in any
particular place, the ‘Woods’ or the ‘Cities’, for a while. The ‘Gypsy’
may be the youth that is choosing to shift into the corporate and
commercial world; it may be the housewife that seeks to break
out; or it may be the dreamer that chooses to put their dreams into
practice and make a killing in business. There can be the worry of
not having much in the way of financial resources or conventional
accreditation. Although one’s gut instincts can see things through,
hard work and changes of perspective are probably needed in order
to actually reach the ‘Far Cities’ and to function there successfully.
Feeling assured that you belong, no matter where you are, is likely
to lead others to take you more seriously.
Keywords: Dreaming of becoming part of something far-off.
Streetwise lessons. New perspectives arising from larger realities.
The steps from bohemian to corporate and vice-versa. Learning
about credentials, using them to advantage. Things that are far off
and distant. Ambition. Prophesy, astrology and tarot. Clairvoyance.
Gypsies. Leaving family. Moving out on one’s own.
The Caution: Dissatisfaction and always looking elsewhere. A
feeling of being “cast out”. Feeling alienated even amongst friends.
Finding your self a long way from home. Difficulty turning back.
Being in limbo with a lack of ambition. Not having a family to
turn to.
Gemini 27
I’m not gonna change the way I
look or the way I feel to conform
to anything.I’ve always been
a freak.So I’ve been a freak all
my life and I have to live with
that,you know.I’m one of those
people.
John Lennon
I have become a queer mixture
of the East and theWest,out
of place everywhere,at home
nowhere.
Jawaharlal Nehru
He had the uneasy manner of a
man who is not among his own
kind,and who has not seen
enough of the world to feel that
all people are in some sense his
own kind.
Willa Cather
I hear that (NewYork Mayor)
Giuliani has cleaned this place
up,but I still found a thousand
ways to get myself messed up.
Richard Ashcroft
The biggest mistake people
make in life is not trying to
make a living at doing what
they most enjoy.
Malcolm S.Forbes
I wish I were with some of the
wild people that run in the
woods,and know nothing
about accomplishments!
Joanna Baillie

<<<PAGE 111>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
88
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
SOCIETY GRANTING BANKRUPTCY
TO HIM,A MAN LEAVES THE COURT
WITH MIXED FEELINGS
Commentary: ‘Society Granting Bankruptcy To Him, a Man Leaves
The Court With Mixed Feelings’. The ‘Man’ has had some moral
or social judgment made, or placed, upon him and now he must
consider where the next phase of his life is going to take him.
For some reason, who he is, or what he’s done, has had to be
considered and judged by others, and probably himself. To reach
such a difficult position could be bitterly disappointing, but there
is the possibility of a new life ahead. All is not lost.
Oracle: This Symbol rarely describes ‘Bankruptcy’ in the literal
sense. There may be ‘Feelings’ of failure along with the need to
have the slate wiped clean, to be able to ‘Leave the Court’ and
have a chance to start over again. When you actually reach rock
bottom there are not many choices as to the way out. There’s a
need to grab hold of hope and let go of fear. The group, or society,
can sometimes accept the responsibility for problems that people
create; and give the individual a second chance. This Symbol can
also show those that feel abandoned because someone has not lived
up to their responsibilities. Alternatively, one may be prepared to
give up everything and move on to a new and better life. The most
important thing about ‘Bankruptcy’ is that it should be undertaken
without leaving feelings of guilt and loss. Forgiving and forgetting
are both necessary. New truths will be learnt and life will turn
around with a feeling of release from the regrets of the past as life
becomes lighter and better. Things will surely pick up again on
many levels. One has to let go of things and be prepared to move
into a new attitude or way of life. The mistakes of the past become
the lessons that make for a better future.
Keywords: Protection. Being let off the hook and free to get on with
a new life. Starting back at square one. Renewal. Sacrifice. The need
to remain optimistic about the future. Release of pressure. Facing
judgment on one’s worth. Booms and busts. Playing with money.
Taking risks in the quest for money. Issues of deserving respect.
Leaving the scene. Feeling sad and relieved at the same time.
TheCaution: Feeling let off the hook and able to commit the same
mistakes. Running full tilt and risking everything. Not learning
the lessons of how to operate in a structured society. Shifting
responsibility onto others. Going “off duty” regardless of how
others feel. Moral bankruptcy. Being kicked out. Using other
people’s resources. Dejected and deserted.
Gemini 28
The worst bankrupt in the world
is the person who has lost his
enthusiasm.
H.W.Arnold
It takes 20 years to build a
reputation… and five minutes
to ruin it.
Anon
The three things most difficult
are:to keep a secret,to forget
an injury,and to make good use
of leisure.
Chilo
Making a life comes before
making a living.
Anon
He is rich who owes nothing.
French Proverb
It is no disgrace to start all over.
It is usually an opportunity.
George Matthew Adams
A man’s judgment is best when
he can forget himself and
any reputation he may have
acquired and can concentrate
wholly on making the right
decisions.
Raymond A.Spruance
Justice and judgment lie often a
world apart.
Emmeline Pankhurst

<<<PAGE 112>>>
GEMINI
T
89
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE FIRST MOCKINGBIRD OF
SPRING SINGS FROM THE TREE TOP
Commentary: ‘The First Mockingbird of Spring Sings From the
Tree Top’. The ‘Mockingbird’ is usually thought of as copying
others and therefore not particularly original. However, although
the ‘Mockingbird’ copies the sounds of other birds, it uses the best
of those sounds to create a very unique call of its own. Some say
that the ‘Mockingbird’s’ call is the sweetest of all, especially if it’s
‘The First Mockingbird of Spring’. It is heralding the new season;
which signifies new life, new growth, warmth and fertility. Being
‘The First’ shows that the ‘Mockingbird’ is ready to spring to action
when it is the right time. It is useful to be like the ‘Mockingbird’
in many circumstances.
Oracle: The trick with this Symbol is to take the best of what’s
available, make sense of it and to then improve it. There can be
a great deal of skill involved in this, but there are always those
who will respond with scorn or jealousy, especially if a success
of some type is involved. Knowing what to discard or leave out
when you have a number of options is a valuable skill and may
need to be employed now. If you are not good at these sorts of
decisions then perhaps you need to employ the services of a good
‘Mockingbird’. It may be important to listen to and see what “song”
‘The Mockingbird Sings’. Are the thoughts original and unique
or are they borrowed from others without any sense of a filter of
personal authenticity? The new “song” that is created can be an
announcement or signal of new beginnings. This can also show
the mimicking of “sounds” to bring joy to those who need to hear
the right thing. Sometimes it is better to tell someone what they
would like to hear than to confront him or her with a harsh reality
or something new and unfamiliar. It will still be, however, uniquely
put together by the ‘Mockingbird’ and should leave anyone who
hears the message happy.
Keywords: Enormous creative potential and talent. Integrating
sounds to find a new melody. Being the first to see potential.
Music and musicians. Interpretation. Pleasing others. Getting
the story out first. Seeing and telling things ahead of their time.
Being an innovator. Passing on messages. Tunes, songs. Positive
vibrations.
The Caution: Taking from others and claiming the credit. Being
noisy.Announcingnewpossibilitiesorjustsoundingoff?Mimicking
others. Not coming up with one’s own creative ideas. Having to
always get in first. Making a noise and expecting others to respond.
Stretching the truth. Revving up a story to get an effect.
Gemini 29
No bird has ever uttered note
that was not in some first bird’s
throat,Since Eden’s freshness
and man’s fall,No rose has been
original.
Thomas Bailey Aldrich
Every man is a borrower and
a mimic,life is theatrical and
literature a quotation.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Use what talent you possess:
the woods would be very silent
if no birds sang except those
that sang best.
HenryVan Dyke
The bird is known by his
note,the man by his words.
Romanian Proverb
If I keep a green bough in my
heart,the singing bird will
come.
Chinese Proverb
The birds I heard today sang as
freshly as if it had been the first
morning of creation.
Henry DavidThoreau
Until spring comes,nightingales
do not sing.
Azerbaijani Proverb
The early bird catches the
worm.
Proverb

<<<PAGE 113>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
T
90
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PARADE OF BATHING BEAUTIES
BEFORE LARGE BEACH CROWDS
Commentary: The ‘Parade of Bathing Beauties Before Large Beach
Crowds’ is reminiscent of the Miss America pageant, where the
women line up in their bikinis and their finest dresses. They present
themselves beautifully and work hard to make an impact with their
looks and grace. Their bodies and their fresh smiling faces are not
only to be admired, but also judged by others.
Oracle: In this situation you may feel as though you are only being
appreciated for your superficial attractions and beauty without
appreciation of your deeper purpose. However, this is what is often
needed in order to gain the attention of others, particularly if they
are strangers. Be aware that you are getting a lot of attention, so it is
important to put on your best face and to present it with confidence
as there is a potential audience that may be used to your advantage.
It is not really the superficiality of the ‘Bathing Beauties’, but really
of the ‘Crowds’ that is revealed here. Those putting themselves
on display are doing so by choice and with some knowledge of
the fact that they are trying to gain the attention, admiration
and appreciation of the people watching. It is the ‘Crowd’ that
is responding to basic responses which may vary from seeking
simple entertainment to voyeurism. Displays of beauty and physical
fitness can bring joy and stimulation from others or jealousy and
derision, so be careful of what’s being revealed and whom you
are revealing it to. After the process of display and attention has
been achieved, there will be opportunities to relate on a deeper
level. When you are able to bring the situation to a more personal
and one-to-one basis some real value can be gained. Something
must begin the process and being noticed for whatever reason is
a good start.
Keywords: Being on show. Sheer attraction of beauty. Seeking
praise. Displaying in order to get people to observe and/or
evaluate. Beauty pageants. Bathing costumes and skimpy clothing.
Beaches. Lifeguards. Beauty judges. Nudist beaches. Breast sizes.
The mysteries of the feminine. Playing dressups. Gatherings of
goddesses. Mermaids converging. The water element. Recognizing
superficiality and shallow behavior. Water nymphs.
The Caution: Using superficialities to win support. Giving
importance to the issues of appearance. Neglecting the “beauty
within”. Too much makeup. Flaunting one’s body. Not employing
intellect. Leering, jeering. Lusting after the unattainable. Feeling
like merchandise. Making superficial judgments.
Gemini 30
Beauty is in the heart of the
beholder.
Al Bernstein
Beauty in things exists in the
mind which contemplates them.
David Hume
That which is striking and
beautiful is not always good;
but that which is good is always
beautiful.
Ninon De L’Enclos
You must look into people,as
well as at them.
Lord Chesterfield
I’mtiredofallthisnonsenseabout
beautybeingonlyskin-deep.
That’sdeepenough.Whatdoyou
want—anadorablepancreas?
Jean Kerr
Sunburn is very becoming,but
only when it is even.One must
be careful not to look like a
mixed grill.
Noel Coward
Beauty is everywhere a
welcome guest.
JohannWolfgangVon Goethe
The ideal has many names,and
beauty is but one of them.
W.Somerset Maugham
You can take no credit for
beauty at sixteen.But if you are
beautiful at sixty,it will be your
soul’s own doing.
Marie Carmichael Stopes

<<<PAGE 114>>>
CANCER
Y
9­
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
ON A SHIP SAILORS LOWER AN OLD
FLAG AND RAISE A NEW ONE
Commentary: ‘On a Ship Sailors Lower an Old Flag and Raise
a New One’ signals a real turning point. A ‘Flag’ is symbolic of
ideals and it represents and shows an allegiance or loyalty to those
ideals. That the ‘Sailors Lower an Old Flag and Raise a New One’
shows a symbolic expression of a change of loyalties or alliances.
Although this may not be a decision made by every one of those
‘On the Ship’, those in charge seem sure of what they’re doing.
What was important before is no longer relevant.
Oracle: There is, or there soon will be, a momentous change in the
works. Something that once stood as part of your life is changing,
whether this is something you desire, or not. As we grow and
change there are many things both big and small, which like
signposts, show or signal our position and beliefs. The changes
could be of clothing, style, work, one’s primary relationship,
sexuality, country or even friends. Some people may be very
pleased with this new shift, while others may feel neglected
or shut out. Indeed, some may be shocked at this seemingly
sudden change, even if it’s been coming for a while. Those who
have been really observant of what’s been unfolding may not be
surprised at all. The important point is that it is not enough to just
go through change as we journey through the emotional seas of
life; we also need to make commitments of some kind and give
obvious signs of where we stand, who we stand with and what
we stand for. Something is changing, possibly dramatically, and
this transformation should be taken seriously. What signals are
you sending out or displaying? It might be a good idea to run any
new ideas or plans up the “flagpole” to see if anybody salutes
them. Making affirmations of what is wanted may be a useful
gesture to yourself and those involved.
Keywords: Changing loyalties. Turning points in one’s obligations
or duties. Announcing new standards. Turning a corner. Getting
rid of the old guard. Letting go of old allegiances and taking
up new ones. Giving up old ways. Changing bad habits. Taking
the helm. Switching sexual preferences. Sailors. Ships. Flags.
Divorces. Marriages. Change of shifts.
The Caution: Rejecting the old just for the sake of change.
Fickleness. Not sticking with one thing for long enough to
realize the rewards of loyalty. Being a traitor. Religious quarreling.
Going only where the “good action” is. Piracy. Mutiny. Treason.
Abandoning former priorities.
Cancer 1
This is the flag of the future,but
it does not dishonor the past.
Lester Bowles Pearson on
Canada’s new maple leaf flag
The world is in everlasting
conflict between the new
idea and the old allegiances,
new arts and new inventions
against the old establishment.
Joyce Cary
Times change and we change
with them.
Anon
It is said that I am against
change.I am not against
change.I am in favor of change
in the right circumstances.And
those circumstances are when it
can no longer be resisted.
The Duke of Cambridge
If you want a symbolic gesture,
don’t burn the flag,wash it.
NormanThomas
If you are ashamed to stand by
your colors,you had better seek
another flag.
Anon
From the death of the old the
new proceeds,And the life of
truth from the death of creeds.
John GreenleafWhittier
Allchanges,eventhemostlonged
for,havetheirmelancholy;for
whatweleavebehindisapartof
ourselves;wemustdietoonelife
beforewecanenterintoanother!
Gail Sheehy

<<<PAGE 115>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
9­
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN ON A MAGIC CARPET
OBSERVES VAST VISTAS BELOW
Commentary: ‘A Man on a Magic Carpet Observes Vast Vistas
Below’ is an image straight out of the “Arabian Nights” stories.
King Solomon would tell the wind where he wanted to go, and
the carpet rose in the air, landing him in the place he designated.
In this Symbol, the ‘Magic Carpet’ can elevate the ‘Man’ above
everything going on in his life, making it possible for him to
escape problems and fly above and away from them. He is able
to see what’s going on from a calm, possibly detached and rather
creative state, with his imagination working strongly.
Oracle: Even though you may feel that there are many possibilities
open to you, you may be unable to proceed with realistic or
grounded plans, leaving you in a state of limbo. It’s important to
make sure that you are not somehow disconnected from reality.
It may be that some of the ‘Vast Vistas’ that are ‘Observed’ are
really only fantasy, imagination or wishful thinking. There may
be more inspiration in your mind’s eye than can be translated
into real life. On the other hand, you are probably in a state of
heightened awareness and have a broad overview of the situation,
which can give you an opportunity to plan for future action.
Try to accept any positive opportunities that are offered, but
allow your self time to put these opportunities into perspective.
What is really possible now? There may be feelings of isolation.
Perhaps you’re running away from the truth or feeling that you’re
the only one who can truly see the whole picture. It is probably
best not to rush into anything permanent now. This is something
that you have to work through slowly and carefully. Remember
the privilege of being given the opportunity of such an elevated
view. Take some time, look around, but remember to come back
to reality when it’s time!
Keywords: Elevated observations and heightened feelings. Having
faith in the good things of life. Not wanting to see the ugly truth of
reality. UFO’s and aliens. Escapism. Perspective and imagination.
Out of body experiences. Dreams. Seeking transcendence. Astral
projection. The dream of far destinations. Film and video.
The Caution: Feeling above everything and unaffected by
situations. Losing touch with reality. Missing the point. Trying to
avoid what’s going on. Peter Pan attitudes. Not feeling responsible
for anything. Longing for something ‘magic’ to happen. Bugging
devices. Living in a fantasy world.
Cancer 2
A field cannot well be seen from
within the field.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Imagination is more important
than knowledge.
Albert Einstein
What if everything is an illusion
and nothing exists? In that case,
I definitely overpaid for my
carpet.
Woody Allen
I know of no more encouraging
fact than the unquestionable
ability of man to elevate his life
by conscious endeavor.
Henry DavidThoreau
Caution:Cape does not enable
user to fly.
Batman costume warning
label
‘Tis distance lends
enchantment to the view,And
robes the mountain in its azure
hue.
Thomas Campbell
Let him who elevates himself
above humanity ...say,
if he pleases,“I will never
compromise”;but let no one
who is not above the frailties
of our common nature disdain
compromise.
Henry Clay

<<<PAGE 116>>>
CANCER
Y
93
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ARCTIC EXPLORER LEADS A
REINDEER THROUGH ICY CANYONS
Commentary: ‘An Arctic Explorer Leads a Reindeer Through
Icy Canyons’ shows a situation of risk and hard slog to get to a
destination. There are two elements here: the ‘Arctic Explorer’
who is prepared to seek out new possibilities even at great risk
to his life, and the ‘Reindeer’ who may have been quite content
where it was, but does not have the possibility (or the imagination)
to find new pastures or the will to assert its own desires. They
have somehow become dependent upon each other for mutual
success and survival. There is no way of knowing exactly what is
going to happen or if they will, indeed, reach their objective. The
‘Reindeer’ may regret being roped into this endeavor, but what
has been started can’t be abandoned or stopped mid-journey.
However, it is actually the ‘Reindeer’ that is naturally suited to
these conditions, enabling it to push onward if the ‘Explorer’
finds it too difficult.
Oracle: It is through adapting to changing needs in the
environment and being constantly aware of the difficulties
involved that success can be achieved. You need to persevere
and progress slowly. There is probably no going back; there may
be little value in retracing your steps. Further, there is probably
no possibility of stopping as the situation could freeze-up in an
instant. You may be surprised by “icy” feelings and cold responses
from yourself, or others. However, these “cold winds” may indeed
have been building up for some time. Although you may have help
from those around you, it is more a time of struggling through
an unusual difficulty rather than worrying about creating any
proper appearance. Be prepared to use warmth and love, as this
will bring more light and joy. Keep going – indeed it may be your
only option.
Keywords: Using animal instincts to get through tough times.
Facing bad weather and hardship. Following the leader without
knowing where one’s going. Unfamiliar surroundings. The point
of no return. Being in a cul-de-sac. Being led around by the hand
(or the nose). Treading carefully. Icebergs. Glaciers. Snow and
ice. Risky ventures. The Titanic story.
The Caution: Taking those unfamiliar to the situation and
unwittingly heading towards danger. Putting one’s self through
hard times when it’s avoidable. Restrictive outlooks on life.
Frozen responses. Frigidity. Feeling lost, alone, frozen with fear
or forsaken. Willingly going the hard way. Lack of provisions.
Cancer 3
It is easier to sail many
thousand miles through cold
and storm and cannibals,in
a government ship with five
hundred men and boys to assist
one,than it is to explore the
private sea,the Atlantic and
Pacific Ocean of one’s being
alone.
Henry DavidThoreau
Patience serves as a protection
against wrongs as clothes do
against cold.For if you put
on more clothes as the cold
increases,it will have no power
to hurt you.
Leonardo daVinci
If you’re going through hell,
keep going.
Winston Churchill
A man never reaches that dizzy
height of wisdom that he can
no longer be led by the nose.
MarkTwain
The state with the highest
percentage of people who walk
to work is Alaska.
Trivia.net
I believe that Ronald Reagan
will someday make this country
what it once was… an arctic
wilderness.
Steve Martin

<<<PAGE 117>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
94
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CAT ARGUING WITH A MOUSE
Commentary: The Symbol of ‘A Cat Arguing With a Mouse’ brings
to mind feelings of unfair play all the way to downright bullying.
The ‘Cat’ may be planning to eventually eat the ‘Mouse’, but he
may also just be throwing it around for his own enjoyment. There
is an imbalance at work here. It seems that someone or something
is trying to gain unfair advantage against a weaker opponent. How
long can someone expect to get away with treating someone as
their victim? The situation may feel life threatening, but could
turn out to be more of a game. The ‘Cat’ may get bored with the
whole thing, or become distracted, if the ‘Mouse’ is lucky!
Oracle: Along with bullying, this Symbol can show bickering,
which ultimately is time consuming and often doesn’t lead to
anything. Trying to influence another’s thoughts by constantly
repeating or going over things is not acceptable, especially if it
feels like harassment. If you feel shell-shocked from being “tossed
around”, physically or emotionally, there may be a need to retire
to somewhere inaccessible while you regain your breath and
your confidence. If someone is tormenting you, why don’t you
become the “mouse that roared”? Just because you are in a weak
or submissive position doesn’t mean you have to sit there and
just take it. Grab any opportunity you can to turn the situation
to your advantage. However, no matter which side you are on,
whether you’re the ‘Cat’ or the ‘Mouse’, there are probably no
true “winners” in this predicament. Also, this Symbol can imply
a lot of ‘Arguing’ going on inside your own mind, which can
lead to feeling dis-empowered. How long can you engage in this
game when the outcome is assuredly a useless waste of time and
energy? Are you man or mouse?
Keywords: Aggressively and actively taking advantage of
situations or people. Hide and go seek games. Aggression vs.
innocence. Harassment. Standing up for one’s self. The David
and Goliath story. Questioning established power structures.
Looking out for one’s best interests. Shock and fear. Cats. Mice.
Hiding. Waiting.
The Caution: Time-wasting arguments and bickering. Being
aggressive because one can. Picking on those smaller. Fighting
dirty. Being patronizing. Power trips. Hiding away to avoid
being targeted. Feeling like someone’s prey. Feeling victimized
and bullied. Antagonism. Unfair battles. Those who think they
know more. Mental, physical or emotional torment. Beating
yourself up.
Cancer 4
When the cat’s away the mouse
will play.
Proverb
It’s not the size of the dog in the
fight;it’s the size of the fight in
the dog.
MarkTwain
When the mouse laughs at
the cat there is a hole nearby.
Nigerian Proverb
The cat in gloves catches no
mice.
Benjamin Franklin
When Goliath came against
the Israelites,the soldiers all
thought,“He’s so big we can
never kill him.”But David
looked at the same giant and
thought,“He’s so big,I can’t
miss.”
Ode to Joy
Kitty heaven is mousy hell.
Anon
The lion and the calf will lay
down together,but the calf
won’t get much sleep.
Woody Allen
The mouse is a magician with
only one trick:it can cast an
illusion that it is as big as an
elephant.
Jessica MacBeth

<<<PAGE 118>>>
CANCER
Y
95
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AT A RAILROAD CROSSING,AN
AUTOMOBILE ISWRECKED BY ATRAIN
Commentary: ‘At a Railroad Crossing, an Automobile is Wrecked By
a Train’. This image sounds rather ominous, however the only way
that an ‘Automobile’ can get ‘Wrecked at a Railroad Crossing’ is if it
gets in the path of the ‘Train’. The ‘Car’ in this Symbol represents the
freewilloftheindividual,havingtheabilitytogointhedirectionthe
driverchooses,andthe‘Train’representsacarriageformanypeople,
the collective. The ‘Train’ can only go on its tracks; it has no ability
to maneuver tricky situations or to change direction quickly.
Oracle: Although this Symbol sounds worse that it often really is,
there is a need for caution. The individual’s ideas or actions will
not easily survive in a collision with the more powerful collective,
especially if they are reckless or not carefully thought through.
Even with the best of intentions, this may not be a good time to be
insistingbravelythatyouoryourneedsbeconsidered.Thecollective
has so much momentum; it will not stop its course to think about
what’s happening to a single individual. If someone pits themselves
and their energies against a group or society, there is a good chance
that they will lose, at least in some way. Be careful how much you
take on in this situation. This Symbol was prevalent in the life and
death of Princess Diana. She was endeavoring to “outrun” the media
on the night of her tragic accident. It seems sure that she was fed-
up with compromising herself with the needs of the media, her
driver speeding in an attempt to outrun them. One can only speed
for so long in life before one becomes an accident victim or some
other kind of statistic. If you examine what risks are being taken in
your situation you may realize the need to slow down or drop the
need to “win” or “outrun”. Done carefully however, you can indeed
challenge the “big guys”, winning and coming out on top.
Keywords: Not looking to the consequences of actions. Recklessly
going for an objective. Not considering the ramifications. Lots of
people causing problems with scheduling. Having the guts to go
against society. Cars, trains. Individual rights. Rebelling. Crossroads.
The need for good timing.
The Caution: Recklessness. Sacrificing individuals for larger gains.
Working until one drops. Not looking left or right for possible
trouble. Going in the wrong direction. Working at cross-purposes.
Not nourishing one’s self. Putting the desire for gain before one’s
more basic personal needs. Valuing possessions before people.
Talking so no one gets a word in. Going off the rails. Upsetting or
obstructing others. Wreckage. Emotional panic. Spinning out of
control.
Cancer 5
Haste makes waste.
Saying
They’re funny things,Accidents.
You never have them till you’re
having them.
Eeyore –Winnie the Pooh
Cover me,I’m changing lanes.
Bumper Sticker
It takes 8,460 bolts to assemble
an automobile,and one nut
to scatter it all over the road.
Bumper Sticker
Everything is energy in motion.
PirVilayat Inayat Khan
I couldn’t repair your brakes,so I
made your horn louder.
Bumper Sticker
Even if you’re on the right track,
you’ll get run over if you just sit
there.
Will Rogers
There is more to life than
increasing its speed.
Mahatma Gandhi
The major cause of auto wrecks
is a screw loose in the nut
behind the wheel.
Bumper Sticker
Decisions are like switch
points on a railroad track.They
determine where you will end
up in life.
Elder Richard G.Scott

<<<PAGE 119>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
96
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN SPRING GAME BIRDS ARE
FEATHERING THEIR NESTS
Commentary: The ‘Game Birds’ in this Symbol can picture the
desire for security in the midst of a rather unstable situation. ‘Birds
Feather Their Nests’ in readiness for a new life and new beginnings.
These are ‘Game Birds’, which can symbolize an unknown future,
danger or threat in the environment. Even though there is an
optimistic feeling about the future and the prospect of a new life
beginning, there is the danger of being expendable in some way.
Oracle: In your situation, endeavor to feel comfortable and right at
home, however, remember that security may only be temporary.
Be careful not to become too complacent, but ensure that you
aren’t frightened at any sudden surprises or moves. You may have
torelinquishwhatyou’vebuiltuporworkedforandhavetomoveon
at some stage. If you are entirely safe and stable in this situation, you
will most probably be able to build a bigger and better ‘Nest’ as time
goes by. From another perspective, this can symbolize situations
where the “parents” need to nurture and protect the “kids”. This
may be in personal relationships or even a business situation. Also
be careful that someone is not trying to kick you, or somebody else,
out of a space that should rightfully be yours. Invasions from other
‘Birds’ can lead to one’s home being endangered, if not completely
taken over by strangers. As human beings we have distanced
ourselves from the “eat or be-eaten” world of nature. However,
we have created other dangers for ourselves and hence the need for
different strategies and survival techniques. Where can you find a
place of security? This Symbol can remind us that we may be able
to do things in comfort and apparent safety, however, if others are
controlling our environment there are still concerns that may have
to be dealt with.
Keywords: Instinctive dedication. Laying the groundwork for those
to come. Creating a base to feel safe. Nurturing. Endangered habitat.
Raising money. Making yourself or someone else comfortable.
Interior decoration. Preparation. Home building. Landlords and
tenants. Noisy or nosy neighbors. Renting vs. owning. Watching for
danger. The nesting instinct. Renovations. Babies' rooms. Working
to pay the mortgage or rent.
The Caution: Being unnecessarily afraid to venture out on “one’s
own”. Taking over other people’s territory. Feeling unwanted.
Danger. Fussing over small details. Over-preparation. Not knowing
howlongonecanholdoutinasituation.Beingvulnerabletochange.
Being at the mercy of others. Endless housework.
Cancer 6
It is an ill bird that fouls its own
nest.
Romanian Proverb
Every bird likes his own nest
best.
Romanian Proverb
However well organized the
foundations of life may be,life
must always be full of risks.
Havelock Ellis
If you have built castles in the
air,your work need not be lost;
that is where they should be.
Now put the foundations under
them.
Henry DavidThoreau
Some people are making
such thorough plans for rainy
days that they aren’t enjoying
today’s sunshine.
William Feather
Conscience is the nest where all
good is hatched.
Welsh Proverb
Whether you wind up with
a nest egg or a goose egg
depends on the kind of chick
you married.
Wall Street Journal
Birds in their little nest agree;
and‘Tis a shameful sight,when
children of one family fall out,
and chide,and fight.
IsaacWatts

<<<PAGE 120>>>
CANCER
Y
97
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO FAIRIES (NATURE SPIRITS)
DANCING ON A MOONLIT NIGHT
Commentary: ‘Two Fairies (Nature Spirits) Dancing On a Moonlit
Night’ is a beautiful image of lightness, fun and carefree joy. The
fact that they are ‘Fairies’ or ‘Nature Spirits’ shows wonderful
energy that can be enjoyed and marveled at. That they are ‘Dancing
on a Moonlit Night’ brings an element of fantasy and beauty—
however, there can be a lack of reality. The relationship of the
‘Two Fairies’ can be wonderful for special occasions, particularly
during romantic moments on a ‘Moonlit Night’, but when daylight
comes they may have to return to the real world.
Oracle: Your intuition and imagination may be heightened now,
with a stronger sense of your spiritual or emotional centers. Allow
your creativity to flow without worrying about its usefulness.
Finding a friend, or friends, to share things with will enhance your
experience. Some caution, though, is necessary. One can get lost
in abstractions and fantasies that can lead away from the truth that
should really be faced. For now, life may seem wonderful, perhaps
idyllic and romantic, but how do, or will, things measure up in the
clear light of day? What will happen if you forget being rational
and just enjoy what’s happening? What is really going on? Are you
truly communicating and understanding each other, or just playing
around because it feels good, or somehow familiar? This Symbol
certainly shows the need for some fun or emotional release. At
the end of the day; we all need a release of the inner spirit. Reality
may appear slightly hazy at the moment, like everything could
slip away in a minute. However, you can reap rewards by letting
your dreams wander into the realms of ‘Fairies and Nature Spirits’.
Before you go to sleep, try thinking of this Symbol and watch for
messages in your dreams.
Keywords: Usually invisible astral realms. Reconnecting with
the feminine. Dancing. Avoiding harsh reality. Slipping away
somewhere unnoticed. Seeing what’s usually hidden. Romances
that have difficulty in the real world. Dreams and fantasies. Sharing
common ground. Full moon celebrations. Moonlight. Sunlight.
Couples inspirited. Women celebrating. Other realms. Invoking
fantasies. Moondances.
The Caution: Losing one’s self in emotional dreaming. Not
seeing the reality of the other you’re “dancing” with. Lacking
responsibility. Escapist attitudes vs. serious decisions. Relationships
with no earthly reality or substance. Something too good to be
true. Finding it hard to connect with others.
Cancer 7
The loveliest of faces are to be
seen by moonlight,when one
sees half with the eye and half
with the fancy.
Persian Proverb
Exuberance is beauty.
William Blake
Dreams are true while they last,
and do we not live in dreams.
Lord AlfredTennyson
Got no checkbooks,got no
banks.Still I’d like to express
my thanks,I got the sun in the
mornin’and the moon at night.
Irving Berlin
The moon develops the
imagination,as chemicals
develop photographic images.
Sheila Ballantyne
They dined on mince,and slices
of quince,Which they ate with
a runcible spoon;And hand in
hand,on the edge of the sand,
They danced by the light of the
moon.
Edward Lear
Look for me by moonlight;
Watch for me by moonlight;
I'll come to thee by moonlight,
Though Hell should bar the
way!
Alfred Noyes

<<<PAGE 121>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
98
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GROUP OF RABBITS DRESSED
IN CLOTHES AND ON DIGNIFIED
PARADE
Commentary: ‘A Group of Rabbits Dressed in Clothes’ can picture
people who may be trying to be more, or act like they are more,
than they really are. The fact that they are ‘On Dignified Parade’
means that they are working to put on a good show and to stand
up for themselves. Our outer garments and demeanor act to both
show and disguise who we truly are and what we are really feel
about ourselves. It’s difficult to completely disguise the attempt,
but the effort of trying to advance themselves may be appreciated
and rewarded with people taking them more seriously. The
'Rabbits' are still 'Rabbits' after all.
Oracle:Yourabilitiescantakealeapaheadofnormaldevelopment,
simply by making an attempt to be or to do more. This Symbol
pictures the process of projecting into the future a higher sense of
being or thinking forward into a more intelligent, more successful
level of life. Another aspect of this Symbol speaks of wanting
to cover up one’s sexuality with an outer display of dignity and
conservatism. This may be a necessity in some more conservative
social circles. Through a sense of inferiority, there may be a need
to take on another’s role or personality. By wearing elaborate
or unusual clothes, gowns, wigs, crowns etc, we can influence
or change how others perceive us. Clothing and costumes can
either elevate or degrade one’s status. Imagine yourself clothed
elegantly and having a ‘Dignified’ stance as this can lead others
to think more of you. Project yourself with a sense of confidence
and dignity. Don’t be restricted by class, or status—excel other’s
expectations, and don’t let anyone “pigeonhole” you.
Keywords: Emulation of higher forms. Procreation and having
babies. Dressing up. Modeling shapes and forms. Parading and
being on parade. Attempts to overcome class barriers. Popularity
competitions. Groups with a particular agenda. Uniforms.
Religious garments. Lifeforms posing as humans. Outfits that
project a particular agenda, regardless of reality. Identification
parade and identikit photos.
TheCaution: Pretending to be what one is not. Sublimating one’s
instinctual (or animal) needs to maintain a dignified, straight
front. Deception. Strutting one’s stuff. Showing off. Demanding
attention.Appropriating an office or sense of authority. Sociopaths.
Losing respect. Criticism of those just starting out.
Cancer 8
You can fool too many of the
people too much of the time.
JamesThurber
Those who do not study are
only cattle dressed up in men’s
clothes.
Chinese Proverb
Lying to ourselves is more
deeply ingrained than lying to
others.
Fyodor Dostoevski
I pretended to be somebody
I wanted to be until finally I
became that person.Or he
became me.
Cary Grant
There’s no labor a man can do
that’s undignified—if he does
it right.
Bill Cosby
A graduation ceremony
is an event where the
commencement speaker tells
thousands of students dressed
in identical caps and gowns
that“individuality”is the key to
success.
Robert Orben
A man is known by the books
he reads,by the company he
keeps,by the praise he gives,
by his dress,by his tastes,by his
distastes,by the stories he tells,
by his gait,by the notion in his
eye.
RalphWaldo Emerson

<<<PAGE 122>>>
CANCER
Y
99
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SMALL NAKED GIRL BENDS OVER
A SPARKLING POND TRYING TO
CATCH A FISH
Commentary: The ‘Small Naked Girl’ represents an innocent
naivety and spontaneous fun. The fact that she’s ‘Small and Naked’
shows that society’s demands and pressures do not yet restrain her.
She ‘Bends Over a Sparkling Pond Trying to Catch a Fish’. What
the ‘Girl’ is trying to catch may be elusive, continually moving and
difficult to grab hold of, or really grasp. This can be physically,
emotionally or mentally. Still, it seems if she just keeps trying, she
may very well succeed.
Oracle:Youmaybeunabletograspthemeaningorthetruepromise
of your situation, but still fascinated with what is happening. Your
position is relatively innocent and your perceptions may be limited,
however lessons will eventually be learnt about what is and what
isn’t possible. This Symbol can indicate the pure thrill of the chase
without considering the consequences of what would happen if
one actually caught something (the reward of the ‘Fish’ in this
Symbol). Keeping a sense of delight and fun whilst going after
what you want will ultimately lead to fulfillment on some level.
However, be wary of doing it for too long if you find that what you’re
trying to accomplish is not working. Naivety and wonder may fade
over time through experience and deeper investigations, but it is
a wonderful place to start from. If frustration sets in, remember
that you’re supposed to be having fun when this Symbol is around.
Keeping a lighthearted approach will ensure that something good
comes from the experience. It is by innocently reaching out for life,
and its wonder and beauty, that we expand ourselves and remain
open to the many possibilities in life.
Keywords: Curiosity. Infantile cravings. Fascination with illusions.
Grasping at abstract ideas. Longing for things. Going for the elusive.
Taking advantage of the young and innocent. Objects that cannot
be held or captured, only dreamt about. Fun found in simple
activities. Childhood games. Communing with nature. Nakedness.
Inexperienced sexuality. Splashing around.
The Caution: Being distracted by simple irrelevancies or
abstractions. The frustration of not getting what one wants.
Grappling more than grasping. Always going after the “sparkling
and shining” things, no matter how based in reality. Sexual
taboos regarding young people. Seeking revenge. Chasing the
unattainable. Frustration and annoyance. Slippery people or
objectives. Gullibility.
Cancer 9
Chance is always powerful.Let
your hook be always cast;in the
pool where you least expect it,
there will be a fish.
Ovid
Grown men can learn from
very little children for the
hearts of little children are pure.
Therefore,the Great Spirit may
show to them many things
which older people miss.
Black Elk
There is always one moment in
childhood when the door opens
and lets the future in.
Deepak Chopra
Don’t bargain for fish which are
still in the water.
Indian Proverb
To climb a tree to catch a fish
is talking much and doing
nothing.
Chinese Proverb
The cat would eat fish,but
would not wet her feet.
Proverb
We have sat on the riverbank
and caught catfish with pin
hooks.The time has come to
harpoon a whale.
John Hope
Hope is nature's way of hiding
truth's nakedness.
Alfred Nobel

<<<PAGE 123>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
100
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGE DIAMOND IN THE FIRST
STAGES OF THE CUTTING PROCESS
Commentary: ‘A Large Diamond in the First Stages of the Cutting
Process’ implies a person or situation that has the potential for
perfection, talent, beauty and considerable wealth. The process
of cutting, grinding and shaping a ‘Diamond’ takes skill, care and
time. As one continues to polish and grind away, a more refined and
beautifulobjectwillemerge.Thefacetsofthegembecomemoreand
more beautiful as the “old bits of rock” are chipped off. However,
care and accuracy are needed in order to shape and mold it, or all
the work that’s been done could easily be spoilt.
Oracle: The situation facing you has probably taken a long time to
quietly develop. Something has been building up and becoming
increasingly solid and real. However, it still needs to be somehow
refinedandhavetheroughedgescutaway.Hackingawayatthingsin
one fell swoop could lead to disaster and shatter any hopes. Striving
for perfection, however, can result in enormous rewards. This can
be some kind of “gift” or beauty that keeps getting better and better.
If someone or something is a bit unformed or “unevolved”, try to
remember that just a little more polishing may reveal a beautiful
gem. Too much importance placed on outer looks or appearances
alonecanleadtocontinualsearchesforperfection.Looktotheinside
where true beauty may reside. However, even beautiful exteriors
can have many flaws, and eventually the whole process may prove
to be rather disappointing. Perhaps there’s a need to relax around
this situation – you’ve probably only seen the first stages of the
final product. With more work comes perfection. Hard work and
pressure will pay off, in the end. A useful thing to do is to imagine
the enormous beauty that’s emerging, regardless of any flaws—on
the inside or the outside.
Keywords:Comingtotermswithinnerworth.Emergingperfection.
Beauty that is still a bit “rough around the edges”. Naivety. Beauty
that is within, even if it has flaws. Potential. Chopping and grinding
awaytogettotheessential.Beingalmost,butnotcompletely,perfect.
Reserving judgment. Self-development courses. Knowing where to
start or finish. Craftsmanship. Finding the best in everything.
The Caution: Leaving an important job unfinished. Seeing the
flaws not the inherent beauty. Being afraid to take the first stab at
something. Being overwhelmed by importance and value. Being
overprotective or insecure. Not seeing the whole picture. Things
unformed and incomplete. A “diamond in the rough”, someone
lacking social polish.
Cancer 10
The gem cannot be polished
without friction,nor man
perfected without trials.
Confucius
Life is a grindstone.Whether it
grinds us down or polishes us
up depends on us.
Thomas L.Holdcroft
He was always smoothing and
polishing himself,and in the
end he became blunt before he
was sharp.
G.C.Lichtenberg
Better a diamond with a flaw
than a pebble without one.
Chinese Proverb
The absence of flaw in beauty is
itself a flaw.
Havelock Ellis
I began to have an idea of my
life,not as the slow shaping
of achievement to fit my
preconceived purposes,but
as the gradual discovery and
growth of a purpose which I did
not know.
Joanna Field
The hues of the opal,the light of
the diamond,are not seen if the
eye is too near.
RalphWaldo Emerson
There are three things extremely
hard:steel,a diamond,and to
know one’s self.
Benjamin Franklin

<<<PAGE 124>>>
CANCER
Y
101
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CLOWN IS CARICATURING
WELL-KNOWN PERSONALITIES
Commentary: ‘A Clown Caricaturing Well-Known Personalities’
symbolizes someone clowning around, doing impersonations (or
taking on other personalities), and putting on a mask. There
can be role-playing here, where someone is putting on an
archetypal “face” and performing because one must, for some
reason. The entire act can be masking what is really going on
within them. This can end up obscuring who one truly is on
the inside. This can be because it is difficult, or compromising,
to let one’s real emotions or thoughts be known. Perhaps there
are secrets or information that it’s best for others not to know.
The ‘Caricaturing’ can take up time whilst things, or conditions,
change for the better.
Oracle: Laughter is often said to be the best medicine and “many
things said in jest” may be a useful thing to remember as you
relax and get things back on the right track. Perhaps someone is
not being real, using masks and play-acting in order to hide what
their true emotions, needs or objectives are. Or, they can just be
playing the fool when the situation needs a more serious response.
This can be acceptable for a while, but, sooner or later, this kind
of behavior can end up being both annoying and frustrating.
This can also be about the need to see things objectively or from
someone else’s point of view. Things may seem exaggerated
and blown out of proportion. “Chameleons”, people who act
differently around different people, are somewhat hard to take
seriously. Are people being true to themselves in this situation?
What is really behind the facial expressions and masks?
Keywords: Exaggerated responses. Wanting to entertain. Show
business. Trying to be something or someone that one’s not.
Putting on a face. Comic performances. Parodies of personalities.
Making fun of someone. Clowns and clowning. Life imitating
art. Always performing. Irony. Satire. Objective observance.
Criticism. Laughter. Caricatures. Cartoons. Lampooning. Voice
impressions.
TheCaution: Being foolish in the face of positive potential. Trying
to cover up reality through buffoonery. Being constantly “on
stage”. Living vicariously. Inauthentic behavior. Not having the
courage to display one’s true self. Putting on a face to manipulate
or fool others. Irritating behavior that wears thin after a while.
Being the laughing stock. Overblown impressions. Loss of true
identity.
Cancer 11
He’s a fool that cannot conceal
hisWisdom.
Benjamin Franklin
Clown and guru are a single
identity:the satiric and sublime
side of the same higher vision of
life.Theodore Rozak
We take greater pains to
persuade others that we are
happy than in endeavoring to
think so ourselves.
Confucius
There are no greater wretches
in the world than many of those
whom people in general take to
be happy.
Seneca
I have spent more than half a
lifetime trying to express the
tragic moment.
Marcel Marceau
Art must discover and reveal
the beauty which prejudice and
caricature have overlaid.
Alain Locke
Thereishardlyanymentalmisery
worsethanthatofhavingour
ownseriousphrases,ourown
rootedbeliefs,caricaturedbya
charlatanorahireling.
George Eliot
Nowthere’ssomesadthings
knowntoman,butain’ttoomuch
sadderthanthetearsofaclown
whenthere’snoonearound.
William“Smokey”Robinson

<<<PAGE 125>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
102
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHINESE WOMAN NURSING A
BABY WHOSE AURA REVEALS HIM
TO BE THE REINCARNATION OF A
GREAT TEACHER
Commentary: The ‘Chinese Woman’ senses something ‘Great’
in the ‘Baby’ she is ‘Nursing’. The fact that she is ‘Chinese’ is
significant, as the ‘Chinese’ have had a long tradition of seeking
the spiritual layers of life. The ‘Woman’ is sensing and seeing
something in the young person that other nannies may not. She’s
aware that he holds great talent and gifts for the future. His ‘Aura
Reveals Him to be the Reincarnation of a Great Teacher’. Being
able to see reverence in young people that appear to be “old” or
“evolved” souls is an expression of a strong intuitive sensitivity.
The ‘Woman’ sees that this child, this ‘Baby’, has a unique and
special talent that can be of benefit to the world in some way. The
‘Child’ needs to be nurtured, nourished and cared for so he can
reach his full potential.
Oracle:Messagesofhopeforthefuturearecomingthroughyounger
and more vital elements. There may be an opportunity to learn
important lessons from younger beings. The feeling that someone
is an “old soul” can be felt but can be rather hard to explain; it
seems to come with a special kind of “knowing”. While taking the
time to try and make sense of it, the benefit or insight may be lost.
The joy and power of young people is fleeting and may require
close attention to truly appreciate. This Symbol shows seeing the
greatness in others, and this may be speaking about you, regardless
of your age. Good nourishment and care increases everybody’s
ability to make the most of their potential. Nurturing and caring
for any small, but nonetheless significant, talents can allow things
to blossom into something beyond present expectations. Are you
a ‘Great Teacher?’ Do you have largely untapped talents?
Keywords: Nurturing innocence and its rewards. Reincarnation
and past lives. Charisma and presence. Channeling entities. Tibetan
mysteries. Monks and the Dalai Lama. Ancient knowledge. Child
prodigies. Seeing greatness ahead of its time. Indigo children.
Discovering latent talent. Visions. Holistic perceptions. Potential.
Nurses. Nannies. Finding "the one". Auras. Special people.
TheCaution: Not seeing the beauty of youngsters. Being overcome
with complexity. Demanding to be recognized. Missing inherent
greatness. Under or over estimating the potential of youth. Pushy
and demanding. Precocious behaviour.
Cancer 12
Every man is a divinity in
disguise.
RalphWaldo Emerson
The promise to all men that
God may take birth within their
souls.
Dane Rudhyar
He whose face gives no light
shall never become a star.
William Blake
We hear about the birth of a
child and ask questions like,
“What did she have? How much
did it weigh?”and“Does it have
any hair?”The Athabaskan
Indian hear of a birth and ask,
“Who came?”
Lisa Delpit
A man is a god in ruins.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Grown men can learn from very
little children for the hearts of
little children are pure.Therefore,
the Great Spirit may show to
them many things which older
people miss.
Black Elk
Where children are,there is the
golden age.
Novalis
Where are you searching for me,
friend? Look! Here am I right
within you.Not in temple,nor in
mosque,not in Kaaba nor Kailas,
but here right within you am I.
Kabir

<<<PAGE 126>>>
CANCER
Y
103
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HAND,WHICH IS HELD OUT
RECEPTIVELY,IS REMARKABLE FOR
THE SUGGESTION OF CHARACTER
IN ITS PROMINENT THUMB
Commentary: ‘A Hand, Which Is Held Out Receptively’ implies
reaching out to others. The ‘Prominent Thumb’ implies a strong
will. This image infers a “handshake” of some kind. A “handshake”
can bridge differences and gaps between people, bring them
closer together and also show that one doesn’t have (or shouldn’t
have!) a hidden agenda. The person reaches out to others showing
their strong ‘Character’. Palmists say the 'Thumb' shows the
predisposition of a person's future and state of health.
Oracle: Although a degree of flexibility needs to exist in this
situation, it will, inevitably, be strength of ‘Character’ and a
willingness to extend one’s self to others that will enable you
to succeed. Being in control of oneself and one’s environment is
an effective and lasting expression of power. It is also important
to note that this Symbol is about strength of will and character,
and that being receptive does not weaken this. In fact, it is by
being receptive that we can truly be powerful and have a positive
influence on those around us. The ‘Prominent Thumb’ can show
a strong sense of determination and a desire to impress others.
However, if this sense of strong determination does not come
accompanied by the ability to compromise and listen, it will only
create the potential for problems. This can also apply to groups
of people and also to elements of your inner self. Reaching out
and extending your ‘Hand’ ‘Receptively’ to others may be what’s
required. Show that you are approachable and caring, and you’ll
most likely see the situation resolve itself naturally. When the
time is right you will be able to “grasp” what is needed.
Keywords: Openness and willingness to extend oneself to others.
Thehandshakeandtheneedforit.Beingapproachableandfriendly.
Palmistry and palm reading. Having a firm will. Introductions.
Strong character. Flexible behavior. Hitchhiking.
The Caution: An aggressiveness and overbearing nature. Feeling
that one is better, or stronger, than others. The smooth handshake
that manipulates to impress one’s personality. Unbending and
dominant behavior. Taking over situations regardless of what
others want. Defensive, insecure, unsure, introverted. Blocking
human exchanges.
Cancer 13
You can’t shake hands with a
clenched fist.
Indira Gandhi
It is easier to point the finger
than to offer a helping hand.
Anon
The lonely one offers his hand
too quickly to whomever he
encounters.
Friedrich Nietzsche
The world can only be
grasped by action,not by
contemplation.The hand is the
cutting edge of the mind.
Jacob Bronowski
Nothing up my sleeve!
Magician’s Saying
Spiritual love is a position
of standing with one hand
extended into the universe
and one hand extended into
the world,letting ourselves be
a conduit for passing energy.
Christina Baldwin
I hate the giving of the
hand unless the whole man
accompanies it.
RalphWaldo Emerson
The fingers must be educated,
the thumb is born knowing.
Marc Chagall
If my hands are fully occupied
in holding onto something,I
can neither give nor receive.
Dorothee Solle

<<<PAGE 127>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
104
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A VERY OLD MAN FACING A VAST
DARK SPACE TO THE NORTHEAST
Commentary: ‘A Very Old Man’ is ‘Facing a Vast Dark Space to the
Northeast’. He may be feeling old, lost and in need of guidance.
Washington DC, the capital of America, from the majority of the
country is in the ‘Northeast’. This is the Symbol of America’s
Sun sign, the 4th July. It speaks of looking towards that place.
This is also the degree of the fixed star Sirius, the star many have
looked to for spiritual direction. The ‘Vast Dark Space’ may feel
like alien or foreign territory. The ‘Very Old Man’ looks to the
‘Northeast’ for guidance; perhaps he is looking at a particular
star or merely “staring into a void”. Can he find salvation there?
answers?—or does he feel lost and deserted? People overwhelmed
by “big brother”, commercialism and the battle to “keep up” can
feel ‘Old’ in some way. However, direction may be found in this
‘Vast Dark Space’.
Oracle: Guidance may be needed, but it can be hard to come by;
faith may be the only light to guide you through. As we grow and
age, we can choose to become more enlightened, with a greater
ability to see spiritual truth. However, you could be feeling that
even faith is difficult to keep hold of at the moment. You may feel
let down by people—friends, family, or lovers, right through to
authorities or the government. There needs to be both trust and
courage that one’s inner wisdom is in touch with some higher
truth. We need this especially when we don’t know where we’re
going and feel like we have to take things one day at a time.
Once we have completed our journey in this life, there is still
the mystery of the next life. Venturing into the unknown when
you think you have seen it all can be a reminder of the thrill of
life. Take some time to look to to the sky at night; this may bring
encouragement and some kind of realization or fulfillment.
Keywords: American Indians and other native peoples that have
been left in the dark. Losing faith in the future. The dying out
of cultures or languages. Washington DC. Staring into a void.
Blindness. Searching for answers. Sirius—the Dog Star. Magnetic
shifts. Compass directions. Stargazing. Navigation. Faith. The
earth’s poles. Astronomy. Vast dark arenas. Wisdom that comes
with age. Feeling old before one's time. Seeking purpose and
direction.
The Caution: Seeing nothing. A lack of purpose. Abandonment,
rejection, loss and darkness. The exploitation and abandonment
of native people. Myopia. Voids. Emptiness.
Cancer 14
Every country has the
government it deserves.
Joseph Marie de Maistre
A man is a very small thing,and
the night is very large and full
of wonders.
Lord Dunsany
We are not afraid to entrust
the American people with
unpleasant facts,foreign
ideas,alien philosophies,and
competitive values.For a nation
that is afraid to let its people
judge the truth and falsehood
in an open market is a nation
that is afraid of its people.
J.F.Kennedy
The greatest thing in the world
is not so much where we stand
as in what direction we are
moving.
Goethe
I never saw a man who looked
with such a wistful eye upon
that little tent of blue which
prisoners call the sky.
OscarWilde
Interestingly,accordingto
modernastronomers,spaceis
finite.Thisisaverycomforting
thought—particularlyforpeople
whocanneverrememberwhere
theyhaveleftthings.
Woody Allen
There’s none so blind as those
who won’t see.
Old Saying

<<<PAGE 128>>>
CANCER
Y
105
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GROUP OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE
OVEREATEN AND ENJOYED IT
Commentary: ‘A Group of People Who Have Overeaten and
Enjoyed It’ is an image of people consuming to their fill and
having a good time of it. It seems they had a big appetite and
have over indulged themselves, and are now feeling satisfied.
They have taken take time out to satisfy their hunger and ‘Enjoy’
the leisure of catching up with what’s going on with others.
There is a certain measure of pleasure and satisfaction, but it is
probably only temporary, and they may need to return to work.
This can be difficult, as overeating can lead to dulled senses
and an inability to make intelligent decisions. People become
energetically bound up in digesting what they’ve “consumed”,
while the body is preoccupied with handling the load. This can
make the mind and body slow and, sometimes, lazy. This Symbol
can picture enjoying “consuming” anything, not only “eating.”
They probably enjoy many of the good things in life.
Oracle: It may be that you, or someone else, have overindulged
in material objects or success. For now, enjoy your good
fortune. Beware, however, as sometimes “feeding frenzies” can
turn into issues that need to be sorted out later. Problems can
be experienced through overspending, overeating, putting on
weight, etc. Constantly overeating or overspending in an attempt
to feel better can lead to issues of self-worth, greed and debt.
There is possibly a need to curb this indulging. Realize when
it’s time to return to work, and to be productive instead of just
swallowing, or “consuming” more and more. In fact, there may
be a need for “tightening the belt”. Commodities, like food, etc.,
may run short now due to extravagance or excess. Remember to
say Grace in thanks for the good fortune you have.
Keywords:Consumerism.Communalcohesionthroughindulging
in the senses. Satisfied hunger. Commercialism and longing to
own things. Eating disorders. The right of everyone to enjoy food
and nourishment. Big business. Success. Enjoying “the good life”.
Having plenty. Abundance. Temporary fulfillment.
The Caution: Self-indulgence through the senses. The “haves”
and the “have-nots”. People going without so that others can
have more. Monopolization. Bloating. Feeling that one deserves
everything on a platter. Overweight. Bad nourishment. Eating
binges. Indigestion. Obsession with ownership. Deprivation.
Exploiting resources. Overspending. Gluttony.
Cancer 15
Appetite comes with eating;
the more one has,the more one
would have.
French Proverb
One weakness of our age
is our apparent inability to
distinguish our needs from our
greeds.
Don Robinson
A fool bolts pleasure,then
complains of moral indigestion.
MinnaThomas Antrim
Life is short.Live it up.
Nikita Khrushchev
I saw few die of hunger;of
eating,a hundred thousand.
Benjamin Franklin
Never eat anything at one
sitting that you can’t lift.
Miss Piggy,Muppet character
Some people wanted
champagne and caviar when
they should have had beer and
hot dogs.
Dwight D.Eisenhower
Gluttony is not a secret vice.
OrsonWells
Indiscriminate study bloats the
mind.
D.Sutten
Never eat anything bigger than
your head.
Kliban

<<<PAGE 129>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
106
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN STUDYING A MANDALA IN
FRONT OF HIM,WITH THE HELP OF A
VERY ANCIENT BOOK
Commentary: The Symbol ‘A Man Studying a Mandala in Front
of Him’ shows someone intent on gaining insight and meaning
through ‘Study’. He is ‘Studying’ a ‘Mandala’ which may be in the
form of a picture, design or structure. This can be anything from
an astrology chart, to an architectural drawing to a sacred image,
etc. The ‘Mandala’ is often a collection of ideas and possibilities,
experiences and lessons, and history and mythology. These things
can be presented as a kind of tapestry. He is ‘Studying’ this ‘With
the Help of a Very Ancient Book’; it has clues and answers from
ages past. Looking to the “secret mysteries” can reveal answers
to life’s questions, and how best to proceed.
Oracle: You may be attempting to understand what these “secret
mysteries”, mentioned above, may mean in the current context
and applying it to the relevance of today. You may be puzzled by
the deeper meanings of the subject you’re ‘Studying’ or trying
to unravel. Reverting to traditional answers is not always easy
in the present day. The key to deciphering these mysteries is in
traditional knowledge and wisdom. Adopting a plan or a strategy
is a good idea, as is following “the rules of the book”. With devices
like the Internet and television, the quicker options are usually
chosen. These methods have their merits, but they can be
enhanced further when teamed up with the older, more tried and
true answers. Perhaps you feel “boxed in” by your situation. You
must seek what is already known in order to understand what’s
happening. If a plan is adopted, make sure it is based on sound
principles and everything should work out. Patience, research
and respect for the past are all vital elements here. A teacher is
likely to appear. Much will be learnt and revealed.
Keywords: Concentration. Overcoming obstacles by gaining
control of one’s inner and outer life. Architecture and strategic
planning. Lessons to be learnt from history. Astrology,
numerology, tarot. Systems of thought that are laid out. Maps.
The rules of warfare—anything with a strategy. Drawing strength
and inspiration from squares and circles. Inward attention.
Mandalas.
The Caution: Ignoring the old wisdom for modern rational
systems. Lack of imagination. Going into a situation unorganized
and unplanned. Trying to gain the better of others by out
strategizing them. Not wanting to put in the work.
Cancer 16
We are called to be architects
of the future,not its victims.
Buckminster Fuller
Can’t nothing make your life
work if you ain’t the architect.
Terry McMillan
I have an existential map;it has
“you are here”written all over it.
StevenWright
God is in the details.Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe
Oh well,back to the drawing
board.
Old saying
But how shall I get ideas?
Keep your wits open! Observe!
Observe! Study! Study! But
above all,Think!Think! And
when a noble image is indelibly
impressed upon the mind—Act!
Orison Swett Marden
A structure becomes
architectural,and not
sculptural,when its elements no
longer have their justification in
nature.
Guillaume Apollinaire
All my best thoughts were
stolen by the ancients.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Ancient laws remain in force
long after the people have the
power to change them.
Aristotle

<<<PAGE 130>>>
CANCER
Y
107
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE SEED GROWS INTO
KNOWLEDGE AND LIFE
Commentary: ‘The Seed Grows Into Knowledge and Life’. The
process of the germination of the ‘Seed’ is slow and progressive,
and must start from the very beginning. This ‘Seed’ may be an
idea, a relationship, a process, a job or a course of study, etc.
From the germination of the ‘Seed’ comes ‘Knowledge and
Life’. Remember the maxim: Think a thought and sow a seed;
sow a seed and do a deed. Do a deed, create a habit; create a
lifestyle.
Oracle: The important thing to realize is that something of
value has the opportunity to develop, but will need nurturing,
attention, fertilization, care and hope. Things grow and, with
time and nourishment, flourish, eventually providing further
‘Seeds’ for the future. However, at first, you may feel as though
you are not growing or developing properly, or fast enough.
Maybe there is dissatisfaction regarding your perceived progress.
Perhaps you feel that everything will take too long if you start at
the beginning. There are no shortcuts with nature—things have
to grow at their own pace and in their own time. It is important
to start small and let things develop from there. Even if you feel as
though there is no time to “baby” along the situation, in the long
run it will be for the best. Sacrifices may be necessary to ensure
the development is complete. This can indicate pregnancy or the
inception of a new idea. In a broader context, there may emerge
a whole new and inspiring approach to, or participation in life. It
could eventually lead to the birth or the growth of something. A
hobby or interest could turn into a money earning project. The
time is fertile for the process of growth to begin.
Keywords: Small and careful beginnings leading to a beautiful
flowering. Seeding things. New ideas bringing fulfillment.
Pregnancy, childbirth and growing up. The growth of
knowledge. Embryonic cells. Giving and receiving lessons. The
urge to grow. Germination. Reaching towards light. Fertilization.
Nourishment. Tender care. Genetic engineering. Transmutations.
Teachers and students. The tree of knowledge. The Kabbalah.
Enjoying each step of the process.
The Caution: Rushing and missing vital parts. Arrogance about
how much one knows. Being afraid to start a project because
of time constraints. Not giving small things the reverence they
deserve. Grabbing the fast dollar. Things that get out of hand.
Cancer 17
The true purpose of education is
to cherish and unfold the seed
of immortality already sown
within us;to develop,to their
fullest extent,the capacities of
every kind with which the God
who made us has endowed us.
Anna Simpson
The seed of God is in us.Given
an intelligent and hard working
farmer,it will thrive and grow
up to God,whose seed it is;and
accordingly its fruits will be
God-nature.Pear seeds grow
into pear trees,nut seeds into
nut trees,and God seed into
God.
Emailer Elkhart
Is life worth living?This is a
question for an embryo,not for
a man.
Samuel Butler
With every deed you are sowing
a seed,though the harvest you
may not see.
EllaWheelerWilcox
We can see a thousand miracles
around us every day.What is
more supernatural than an egg
yolk turning into a chicken?
Rutherford Platt
In creating,the only hard thing
is to begin:a grass blade’s no
easier to make than an oak.
James Russell Lowell

<<<PAGE 131>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
108
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HEN IS SCRATCHING FOR HER
CHICKS
Commentary: ‘A Hen is Scratching For Her Chicks’. The essential
need for nourishment must be satisfied in order to proceed in
life. There is no guarantee that she will find food where she is
‘Scratching’, but a wise “mother” knows where nourishment is
likely to be found. It is for her offspring, for herself or for others
that she is searching and ‘Scratching’ for. ‘Scratching’ the ground
is the instinctive, traditional way that ‘A Hen’ looks for food. For
a mother ‘Hen’ this process has an inherent element of sacrifice,
or at the least concern for others ahead of her own needs.
Oracle: This Symbol is about Motherhood and its inherent
responsibilities. This Symbol is encouraging you to take action
to find nourishment, protection and the other things necessary
for the well being of both yourself and those in your care. It is
not just about being caring and vigilant, it also means getting
down to business and finding what is needed for those less able
than yourself, regardless of how difficult or time consuming it
may be. This is also showing that there are those around who are
dependent on others to provide nourishment. When those you
care about have what they need you will have the opportunity to
look after yourself. However, you may be the mother hen, or you
may be the ‘Chick’. This nourishment can mean both the literal,
i.e. food, and the symbolic, spiritual caring and guidance. You
are being asked to understand and accept the responsibilities of
caring for and looking after others. If you are in the position to
nurture, however, be cautious not to be overprotective or fussy
over your brood.
Keywords: Searching for sustenance. Being devoted to nurturing
small beginnings. Concern for the essential, small details.
Repetitive cycles of things that have to be done. Being the
“breadwinner”. Doing one’s duty. Being loaded with responsibility.
Children. Progeny. Feeding others. Catering. Seeding ideas. Latch-
key children. Working long hours.
TheCaution: Pointless searching where there is no nourishment.
Fussing too much. Not letting people grow up. Neglecting to
nourishthosewhoneedit.Actinglikeamotherhen.Nolifeofone’s
own. Becoming a martyr for others. Self-sacrifice. ‘Scratching’ for
tiny rewards. Codependence. Tiring responsibilities. Scratching
and picking. Paying the bills for others. Expecting to be looked
after.
Cancer 18
The heart is the household
divinity which,discharging its
function,nourishes,cherishes,
quickens the whole body,and
is indeed the foundation of life,
the source of all action.
William Harvey
An atmosphere of trust,love
and humor can nourish
extraordinary human capacity.
One key is authenticity:parents
acting as people,not as roles.
Marilyn Ferguson
My father had always said there
are four things a child needs:
plenty of love,nourishing food,
regular sleep,and lots of soap
and water.After that,what he
needs most is some intelligent
neglect.
Ivy Baker Priest
Sometimes you struggle so
hard to feed your family one
way;you forget to feed them
the other way,with spiritual
nourishment.Everybody needs
that.
James Brown
A mother never realizes that her
children are no longer children.
James Agee
To nourish children and raise
them against odds is in any
time,any place,more valuable
than to fix bolts in cars or
design nuclear weapons.
Marilyn French

<<<PAGE 132>>>
CANCER
Y
109
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FRAGILE MISS,REPRESENTATIVE
OF PROUD OLD BLOOD,IS WED IN A
MARRIAGE CEREMONY BY A PRIEST
TO AN EAGER YOUTH OF THE NEW
ORDER
Commentary: ‘A Fragile Miss, Representative of Proud Old Blood,
is Wed in a Marriage Ceremony by a Priest to an Eager Youth of
the New Order.’ The ‘Fragility’ and respectability of the past is
energized with the ‘Eagerness’ of the new. The two people marry,
even though they come from quite different backgrounds. The
‘Old’ and conservative is “married” to the ‘New’ and ‘Eager’.
Oracle: A ‘Marriage’ of any kind can bring people together and
produce wonderful things as a result. There comes a time when
the ‘Old’ ways, ideas or behaviors need to be renewed with
fresh ‘Blood’. But the old ways should not be merely replaced by
updated methods, but rather blended to attain the best of both
worlds. The important thing is what this union can produce.
This is the birth of something with the potential for change, new
ideas and new growth. There may be some problems in the early
stages, as others may object to this ‘Marriage’. The ‘Eager Youth’
may not immediately fit the stereotype of the ‘Fragile Miss’’ family.
Sometimes there’s the fear of upsetting family by introducing new
people or even new ideas. Every type of ‘Marriage’ needs to go
through its ups and downs. Bridging generation gaps, altering
prejudices, updating ‘Old’ ideas and breaking social rules can
come as a result of any successful union. Simple expressions of
our heart and mind may be acknowledged in ritual performances
or a ‘Ceremony’ of some kind. This may require a sanctification,
or blessing, from a higher power or authority.
Keywords: Wedding ceremonies. Sanctified unity. Expressions
of loyalty and allegiance. Making sacred vows. Commitment
to a person or project. New ventures involving a lowering of
accepted standards. Breaking social norms. Integration of heart
and mind. Bridging generation gaps. Marriage guidance. Contracts
signed and honored. Handclaspings. Hatch, match and dispatch
ceremonies. Celebrants.
The Caution: Rigidly following established rules at the expense
of new ways that may have greater personal relevance. Forcing
people to come together. Bondage to social expectations.
Arranged marriages. Taking risks with partners. Conforming to
the expectations of the others.
Cancer 19
Tis not the many oaths that
make the truth;But the plain
single vow,that is vow’d true.
William Shakespeare
I dreamed of a wedding of
elaborate elegance;a church
filled with flowers and friends.I
asked him what kind of wedding
he wished for;he said one that
would make me his wife.
Anon
Marriage is our last,best chance
to grow up.
Joseph Barth
The curse which lies upon
marriage is that too often the
individuals are joined in their
weakness rather than in their
strength—each asking from the
other instead of finding pleasure
in giving.
Simone de Beauvoir
MARRIAGE,n.The state or
condition of a community
consisting of a master,a
mistress,and two slaves,making
in all,two.
Ambrose Bierce
Marriage is a great institution,
but I’m not ready for an
institution.
MaeWest
A good marriage is like a good
trade.Each thinks he got the
better deal.
Ivern Ball

<<<PAGE 133>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
110
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
VENETIAN GONDOLIERS IN A
SERENADE
Commentary: ‘Venetian Gondoliers in a Serenade’ is a Symbol
that speaks of the ideals of romantic fantasy. Although it can
sometimes sound like an old cliché, the ‘Gondoliers Serenading’
is the sort of fantasy or special event that many people long for
or desire. To be pampered, cared for and transported to a place
of romance can be just what is needed, though there may be a
need for caution if the romance is really just a fairytale.
Oracle: This Symbol encourages the breaking away from any
restriction of expectation and letting yourself float on the
pleasure of romance. Someone may be a little frustrated or
bored, and looking to find ways to satisfy their emotional needs.
Although this is not the time for seriousness, don’t be fooled by
any insincere charades. You may need to develop trust in those
around you to be able to surrender to your feelings spontaneously.
If the circumstances are right, surrendering to romance should
be enjoyed to the hilt. Don’t let doubts get in the way of love
or passion; but, do be cautious that you’re not being used for
someone’s imaginary or idealistic life. Look to see if you are
ignoring the truth of a relationship in order to satisfy someone
else’s needs. Read between the lines of what’s truly being said,
or the emotions that are conveyed. Look for anything misleading
or overblown. Someone may try to convince others of how good
they are, or compete with others for love. Be wary of reacting to
others who have recently come into the picture, especially those
that are vying for affections. Those working hard at winning
others over can lead to not being taken seriously. In the end,
people get found out for who they really are. Seek out honesty
and truth and love will fill your life.
Keywords: Romantic fantasy. Singing and music. Performance.
Public speaking. Impressing people with joy, romance, fun and
the wonder of life. Venusian displays. Issues of the truth. Ease of
communicating. Working to win people over. Appealing to the
beloved. Elegance. Floating on the emotions. Festive atmospheres.
Nostalgia. Boats. Water.
TheCaution: Insincere charades. Retreating into one’s self. Saying
whatever it takes to get what one wants. Superficial displays.
The delusion of being beyond criticism. Emotional manipulation.
Sucking up to others. Misplaced trust. Competing for affections
or attention. Losing one’s self.
Cancer 20
If music be the food of life,play
on.
William Shakespeare
Anything that is too stupid to
be spoken is sung.
Voltaire
Love is like a violin;the music
may stop now and then,but
the strings will remain forever.
Anon
The French are true romantics.
They feel the only difference
between a man of forty and
one of seventy is thirty years of
experience.
Maurice Chevalier
If you describe things as
better than they are,you are
considered to be a romantic;if
you describe things as worse
than they are,you will be called
a realist;and if you describe
things exactly as they are,you
will be thought of as a satirist.
Quentin Crisp
Beware of over-great pleasure
in being popular or even
beloved.
Margaret Fuller
He must have a truly romantic
nature,for he weeps when there
is nothing at all to weep about.
OscarWilde

<<<PAGE 134>>>
CANCER
Y
111
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PRIMA DONNA SINGING
Commentary: ‘A Prima Donna’ is the principal female singer
in an opera. The expression ‘Prima Donna’ is Italian for “first
lady”. This can be a double-edged image. The positive reality
of the ‘Prima Donna’ is someone whose talents allow, or cause,
them to stand out from the crowd. Here the ‘Prima Donna’ is
pictured ‘Singing’, which means that her talent is being shared
and hopefully enjoyed by all. Her voice, song and words resonate
with many and bring messages from the stories or the myths
of our lives and society. On a more negative level, the ‘Prima
Donna’ can be the fussy, demanding type who expects special
and unreasonable consideration for her talents or her position
in society. Many adore such people, while others can become
completely bored, especially if the ‘Prima Donna’ doesn’t know
how or when to stop “performing”.
Oracle: This Symbol can indicate that someone’s abilities, talents
or limits will be tested. To fully win in this situation, one must
open up their heart and let go of inhibitions, while others should
drop their judgments. This will please some that are listening
and allow people to feel fulfilled. Even where there are a lot of
voices, there will be one that will be most listened to. Is this your
voice or someone else’s? Sometimes the ‘Prima-Donna’ demands
more attention than they truly deserve. Having a loud voice can
be annoying and create an imbalance that destroys the harmony
or balance of the group. However, lifting your voice to convey
messages that are powerful and moving can be very rewarding.
The thing to remember is that we all have talent that distinguishes
us from others in some way. Sometimes it is not so obvious, but
it is within us all in some description.
Keywords: Powerful voice. Emotional dramatizations. Talent.
Taking center stage. Messages that need to be heard for social
reasons. Playing out the myths of society. Makeup, hairstyles,
wigs and costumes. Feeling important and special. Singing and
performing. Opera and drama. Fame and fortune. Charisma and
presence. Commanding attention. Having control and good
timing. Flowers or brickbats. Years and years of training or
improvising on the spot.
The Caution: Overplaying one’s role. Displaying noisily. Driving
people to distraction. Refusing to keep quiet. Demanding to be
heard. Wanting everyone to listen. Overreacting. Throwing
tantrums. Not knowing when to stop. Passions worn on the
sleeve. Showing off.
Cancer 21
We respond to a drama to that
extent to which it corresponds
to our dream life.
David Mamet
A singer starts by having his
instrument as a gift from God
...When you have been given
some thing in a moment of
grace;it is sacrilegious to be
greedy.
Marian Anderson
Success can make you go one
of two ways.It can make you
a prima donna—or it can
smooth the edges,take away
the insecurities and let the nice
things come out.
BarbaraWalters
My voice has been raised not
only in song,but to make the
big world outside through me,
understand something of the
spirit of my beloved country.
Dame Nellie Melba
I’m not a major talent;I’m a
product of the people.
Garth Brooks
Whenever you think that you
are getting too big for the
people around you,remember
all that separates you from the
guy sitting next to you is a little
piece of gristle in your throat.
Marilyn Horne

<<<PAGE 135>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
112
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A YOUNG WOMAN AWAITING A
SAILBOAT
Commentary:‘AYoungWoman’isseen‘AwaitingaSailboat’.Shehas
hopes in mind that something special will either arrive or happen in
someway.Thereisastrongsensethatsomeidealshe’shopingforwill
cometoherifshewaitslongenough.Oftenthereisdelightinlooking
forward to a particular pleasure or event. However, sometimes it
feels like one’s “ship” will never come in. The ‘Young Woman’ can
be left waiting for a long time. She may miss other aspects of her life
bynotpayingattentiontowhat’sreadilyavailable.Viewedpositively,
the ‘Waiting’ can lead to a pleasurable anticipation of what, or who,
may arrive. Sometimes we actually vicariously enjoy it in advance,
dreaming of what rewards may come.
Oracle: You may need to be patient, and confident that what you
want will come to you. However, there is a warning not to become
dependent on an unreliable outcome. Also, if you are constantly
lookingout,thenyouareprobablynotspendingenoughtimelooking
back or inwardly at the things you already possess or have ready
accessto.Peopledreamoftheperfectpartnersuddenlyappearing,or
the big win in the lottery that will rescue them from their problems
or dull lives. The outcome may prove to be less than imagined.
Often, the more we look forward to something, the less we enjoy
it when it actually arrives. Bearing that in mind, we should draw to
ourselves the things we truly desire through positive affirmations
and a determined focus on a desired outcome. Clean the barnacles
off your 'Sailboat' – the remnants of the past – so that new life, love
and spirit can come to you. It is the level of confidence that supports
our ‘Waiting’ that can determine the success of the outcome. When
the tide changes, your “ship” may very well come in. Make sure you
are rowing your own boat and steering your own course.
Keywords: Waiting for one’s ship to come in. Escapist fantasies
that rob everyday life. Travel and the longing for escape. Living
in the future vs. being in the here and now. Nervous anticipation.
Leavingthingstochance.Believingthatthingswillcomeeventually.
Opportunism.Rockingsomeone’sboat.Expectantwaiting.Constant
looking to the horizon. Boats. Tides. Creating a safe harbor.
The Caution: The bubble bursting. Waiting for Mr. or Ms “perfect”.
Ignoring what’s readily available. Longing for that which may never
come. Missing opportunities. Always looking over one’s shoulder,
seekingbetterthings.Boredomwithone’slife.Escapism.Possibilities
that are never “good enough”. Pining for the unattainable. Not
taking life on. Delusions of grandeur. Things always being better
tomorrow.
Cancer 22
We love to expect,and
when expectation is either
disappointed or gratified,we
want to be again expecting.
Samuel Johnson
The real voyage of discovery
consists not in seeking new
landscapes,but in having new
eyes.
Marcel Proust
You can’t cross the sea merely
by standing and staring at the
water.Don’t let yourself indulge
in vain wishes.
RabindranathTagore
How much of human life is lost
in waiting.
RalphWaldo Emerson
If your ship doesn’t come in,
swim out to it!
JonathanWinters
Fortune brings in some boats
that are not steered.
William Shakespeare
Every ship is a romantic object,
except that which we sail in.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Everything you want is out
there waiting for you to ask.
Everything you want also wants
you.But you have to take action
to get it.
Jack Canfield

<<<PAGE 136>>>
CANCER
Y
113
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE MEETING OF A STUDY GROUP
OR LITERARY SOCIETY
Commentary: ‘A Study Group’ or a ‘Literary Society’ pictures
people coming together to share opinions and ideas. The ‘Society’
can symbolize any situation where people get together to discuss
and share their thoughts; from a board or committee meeting
to a gathering of people with common goals or interests. With
modern communications, such as the Internet and large-scale
publishing, efforts can reach right out to the masses and the
collective. Finding the best way to analyze, direct or describe
something creates better understanding for others.
Oracle: Situations or creative ideas can be given an objective,
critical analysis or review in order to see what’s really going on
and what can be shared with others. However, the ‘Meetings’ are
best served in the search for greater meaning in order to enrich
people, the group or the populace. There may be the need to
have patience and an “ear” for what the whole ‘Group’ has to
say, instead of allowing people to just push their own beliefs,
desires or agenda. This being said, however, individuals need to
have the opportunity to have their visions and thoughts aired.
They can hold useful, creative or new ideas, which may promote
better outcomes. If you, or someone else, have something to say,
say it. People will listen, even if some act as though they’re not
really interested. Is everyone having their say, in this situation
or are some merely “hogging the floor”? Who’s in charge here?
Are they doing the job honestly and sharing with others? Is this
‘Meeting’ being run with everyone considered on an equal basis?
Be careful that these ‘Meetings’ don’t turn out to be all talk and
no action. What is the agenda?
Keywords: Shared higher knowledge. Print media, libraries.
The written word. Committees. The movie Dead Poet’s Society.
Work shopping and brainstorming. Critics and criticism. Diaries,
records and minutes of meetings. Newspapers and news media.
Consulting with learned people. Talkback radio. Sharing beliefs
and ideas. The mirrors of society. Discussions. Letters to the
editor. The meeting of the minds. Reviews.
TheCaution: Falsifying of ideas. Propaganda spread by the media.
Intellectual smugness. Excluding anything non-establishment.
Chatting instead of doing. Intellectual bickering. Analyzing every
piece of information until it loses its inherent message. Being told
only what’s safe to reveal. Disinformation.
Cancer 23
Great minds discuss ideas;
average minds discuss events;
small minds discuss people.
Eleanor Roosevelt
Let me never fall into the vulgar
mistake of dreaming that I
am persecuted whenever I am
contradicted.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Insanity in individuals is
something rare—but in groups,
parties,nations and epochs,it is
the rule.
Friedrich Nietzsche
Half of the American people
never read a newspaper.Half
never voted for President.One
hopes it is the same half.
GoreVidal
Those who write clearly have
readers;those who write
obscurely have commentators.
Albert Camus
The well bred contradict other
people.The wise contradict
themselves.
OscarWilde
From the moment I picked your
book up until I laid it down I
was convulsed with laughter.
Someday I intend reading it.
Groucho Marx
A good review from the critics is
just another stay of execution.
Dustin Hoffman

<<<PAGE 137>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
114
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
Cancer 24
Paradise is always where love
dwells.
Richter
Any one must see at a glance
that if men and women marry
those whom they do not love,
they must love those whom
they do not marry.
Harriet Martineau
Successful marriage is always a
triangle:a man,a woman,and
God.
Cecil Myers
There were three of us in
our marriage,so it was a bit
crowded.
Diana,Princess ofWales
Don’t look now,but there’s one
too many in this room and I
think it’s you.
Groucho Marx
Of all human powers operating
in the affairs of mankind,
none is greater than that of
competition.
Henry Clay
Do not put your spoon into the
pot that does not boil for you.
Romanian Proverb
In married life,three is company
and two none.
OscarWilde
A WOMAN AND TWO MEN (OR A
MAN AND TWO WOMEN) CAST
AWAY ON A SMALL ISLAND
Commentary: ‘A Woman and Two Men (or a Man and Two
Women) Cast Away On a Small Island’ is an image of people
being or living in close proximity. They are ‘Castaways’ and are
somehow “stuck” with one another for the time being. They could
be thrown together by circumstances or by choice. Regardless,
being on a ‘Small Island’ leaves no way of concealing behavior
or keeping secrets and things get found out, sooner or later. It
can reflect situations that are out of balance with the normal
harmony of relationships. Things need to be dealt with carefully
and sensitively.
Oracle:Thepeopleseenheremaybe“locked-in”tosomesituation,
environment or relationship. Their desires may be vacillating from
one extreme to the other. There could be a desire to get away
from those who have conflicting views or are trying to confuse
things. There may be uncomfortable and even impossible choices
to be made. At this time, however, removing one’s self from the
situation may not be possible. The value of this experience is to
attempt to create new understandings and standards in order
to turn the imbalance to everyone’s advantage in whatever way
possible. It may be impossible, but it is necessary to try. This
Symbol can also reflect personality issues and confusions that are
happening on an inner level. Symptoms of ill health, unhappiness,
mood swings and temper tantrums can be an indication of an
inner battle. This may be because of a change in relationships,
beliefs or ideals. It may be a hidden memory or inner childhood
issue that is rising to the surface and now manifesting in split
relationships or similar problems. Take some care to work with
the issue, as battling it out can lead to problems. Working out
each person’s position in the situation will help you to decipher
what’s really going on and who belongs with who.
Keywords: Feelings of being fenced in. Too little room to move.
Lack of privacy. Relationship triangles. Claustrophobia. Isolation.
Love affairs. Too many people or having no one. Having to
schedule people’s needs. Competition and rivalry. Polygamy.
The Caution: Not seeing the whole picture. Fighting over one’s
“territory”. The specter of “someone else”. Jealousy. Sexual
infidelity. Misleading relationships. Being shut out of relationship.
Fickleness. Not being able to choose. Having too many people
to consider.

<<<PAGE 138>>>
CANCER
Y
115
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LEADER OF MEN WRAPPED IN AN
INVISIBLE CLOAK OF POWER
Commentary: ‘A Leader of Men Wrapped in an invisible Cloak of
Power’ is an image of someone who has the charisma, leadership
or position that implies great authority and responsibility. Often
these things need to be handled carefully, having a lot of ‘Power’
can lead to corruption and abuse of privileges. As this pictures a
‘Leader of Men’, this person must work for the good of the whole
– not purely for personal advantage.
Oracle: There comes a time for most of us when we have to rise
to the occasion as someone in charge or as a decision maker.
Whatever the situation, there is a need to accept that you, or
someone else, has this level of ‘Power’, and this must be used
and wielded wisely. You have an unavoidable obligation to
accept responsibility and respond rationally. It may be that you
have not sought out this ‘Power’ or position of ‘Leadership’. It
can feel as though it has been thrust on you, but you have been
placed in this position and you need to understand and accept
the consequences. This Symbol can also mean the abdication or
giving away of your power to others – people who seem stronger
or more in charge than yourself. The responsibility of it can be
refused and handed on. Alternatively, if someone is abusing
their authority, others can be roused to remove this ‘Cloak’ or
“mantle”, thereby stripping them of their authority or control.
Positively, the ‘Invisible Cloak of Power’ can be something that
lands in one’s lap, and must be responded to with responsibility
and acceptance. We can all be our own “gurus”—taking on our
own sense of strength and ability. Sometimes we can find this out
through the agency of someone else. Don’t wait for somebody
to tell you of your ability—believe in your ‘Power’ and act on it.
Wearing a special shawl or ‘Cloak’ can work wonders to attract
power and energy.
Keywords: Leadership and its honors and responsibilities.
Powerful descent of energies taking over one’s being. Feeling
invincible—one can do nothing wrong. Hugging and being
hugged. Sore shoulders. Shawls and cloaks that empower or cover-
up. Gurus. Quiet, unassuming strength. Charisma, strength and
presence. Beautiful coats. Furs. Huge personalities.
TheCaution: Shows of superiority. Presuming oneself to be more
than one is. Megalomania. Abuse of power. Not owning one’s
magnificence. Having the weight of the world on your shoulders.
People on power trips. Lording it over others. Being pushy.
Cancer 25
Great hearts steadily send
forth the secret forces that
incessantly draw great events.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Leadership is practiced not so
much in words as in attitude
and in actions.
Harold S.Geneen
A leader is best when people
barely know he exists.
Witter Bynner
Nearly all men can stand
adversity,but if you want to
test a man’s character,give him
power.
Abraham Lincoln
A person wrapped up in himself
makes a small package.
Harry Emerson Fosdick
It is better to be violent,if there
is violence in our hearts,than
to put on the cloak of non-
violence to cover impotence.
Mahatma Gandhi
A man who lives right,and is
right,has more power in his
silence than another has by his
words.
Phillips Brooks
All I want is a warm bed and a
kind word,
and unlimited power.
Ashleigh Brilliant

<<<PAGE 139>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
116
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
GUESTS ARE READING IN THE
LIBRARY OF A LUXURIOUS HOME
Commentary: The Symbol ‘Guests are Reading in the Library of a
Luxurious Home’ pictures people taking an opportunity to relax
and enjoy themselves in comfortable surroundings. It is a time to
catch up on the thoughts of others, whether by reading books,
magazines, newspapers or having quiet moments in conversation
with people without feeling any pressure to return to work. If one
feels at home in this situation, there will be feelings of release and
relaxation. There is the opportunity to do some reading, a few
crossword puzzles, perhaps some researching or learning, etc.
There does, however, need to be caution against self-indulgence,
or just sitting around as this could lead to laziness and a lack of
motivation to get going with life. The ‘Luxurious Home’ illustrates
the fact that the opportunity to take time out to read, or learn is
really a ‘Luxury’ for many people.
Oracle: If you feel that everything is too confusing and
complicated, you should go somewhere that allows for quiet times
and informed reflection. We all lead busy lives, but finding time for
‘Reading’ or other leisure activities should not have to be difficult.
Remember that life consists of more than work. Play as much
as you can – don’t live life dreading the weekdays and longing
for weekends. Nowadays, you don’t even have to leave home to
enjoy others and exchange thoughts; the Internet can bring both
people and huge libraries of information, saving you the effort of
physically going out and searching for them. We are able to have
access to a wide range of information, comment and imagination
without the restrictions of having to be wealthy—both in the
luxury of time and the availability of valuable material.Don't
cut yourself off from other people, though, as this could lead
to loneliness.
Keywords: Sharing of thoughts and ideas in an environment of
social privilege. Social protocol that says what one should be
digesting, emotionally, intellectually or physically. Libraries.
Hotel reading rooms. Chatting quietly. Books, magazines. Quiet,
knowing atmosphere. Learning and sharing ideas. Having friends
over. Relaxing. Taking time off. Study groups.
The Caution: Relating on a superficial level or not being able to
relate at all because of social expectations. Being told to “keep
quiet”. Not saying what one really feels. Focusing on the mind, not
the heart. Not being invited to the inner circle. Special privileges
for the few.
Cancer 26
A house is not a home unless
it contains food and fire for
the mind as well as the body.
Margaret Fuller
A room without books is like a
body without a soul.
MarcusT.Cicero
The man who does not read
good books has no advantage
over the man who can’t read
them.
MarkTwain
Neverlendbooks,fornooneever
returnsthem.TheonlybooksI
haveinmylibraryarebooksthat
otherfolkshavelentme.
Anatole France
You don’t have to burn books
to destroy a culture.Just get
people to stop reading them.
Ray Douglas Bradbury
Books like friends should be few
and well chosen.
Joineriana
War and Peace must wait for
the leisure of retirement,which
never really comes:meanwhile
it helps to furnish the living
room.Blockbusting fiction is
bought as furniture.
Anthony Burgess
The richest minds need not
large libraries.
Amos Bronson Alcott

<<<PAGE 140>>>
CANCER
Y
117
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A VIOLENT STORM IN A
RESIDENTIAL CANYON FILLED WITH
VALUABLE HOMES
Commentary: ‘A Violent Storm in a Canyon Filled With Valuable
Homes’ shows that a ‘Storm’ has released its fury on those in its path.
The ‘Weather’ that has been unleashed can reflect actual weather,
or psychological or emotional conditions. The ‘Homes’ need not be
""expensive", but are places that are 'Valuable' to the occupants, they
usuallyfeelprotectedandsafe.Somehow,a‘Storm’hasragedthrough.
Exactly what will happen next may be rather uncertain.
Oracle: You may find yourself much deeper in a situation than you
may have imagined, and now you are caged by the “walls” around
you. There is probably no immediate escape from the turbulence
that is happening. You may have had some forewarning that this
‘Storm’ was coming; with pressure piling up, threatening to explode
atanymoment.Youmayhavehadnointentionormadenoparticular
movements to invoke this ‘Storm’, however it’s out of hand in your
environment nonetheless. The best thing to do is to wait it out and
protectyourself,andthosearoundyou.Althoughthismayhavebeen
building for days, or years, many are often taken by surprise at the
sudden turn of events or the intensity of what’s being unleashed. An
event or something that was said can let loose a torrent of emotional
andphysicalenergythatmaybehardtocontain.Infact,endeavoring
tocontainitmayresultinmoredamage.Thingsprobablyneedtoblow
themselves out naturally. A positive outcome may not come to light
for awhile, but things will fall back where they are meant to, in the
end.Lookbacktoseewhatyou’vecontributed,asitmayhelptoseea
wayout,oratleastreconcilewhat’shappened.It’slikelythatanumber
of people have been affected. It may be a disaster, or it may end up
being a blessing in some way. See if you can rebuild your community
– some people may have to be left out of your life, however.
Keywords: Arguments and emotional confrontations. The “pressure
cooker” environments of modern-day living. Psychic energy
unleashed. Furious emotions. Changing the status quo. Bad weather
and its consequences. Rebuilding from the foundations. Living in
canyons. Being surrounded by mountainous peaks. The awesome
power of nature.
The Caution: Wrongly believing that you are in control of the
uncontrollable. Enjoyment of emotional storms and turmoil. Lots
of noise that erupts out of nowhere. Whipping things up. Life-
threateningbehavior.Confrontations.Stormfronts.Socialupheavals.
Disturbing or violent reactions. Domestic violence.
Cancer 27
Try to relax and enjoy the crisis.
Ashleigh Brilliant
Watch out for emergencies.
They are your big chance.
Fritz Reiner
A man is sometimes lost in the
dust of his own raising.
David Ruggles
It is your business when the wall
next door catches fire.
Horace
Rain does not fall on one roof
alone.
Cameroon Proverb
You don’t develop courage
by being happy in your
relationships everyday.
You develop it by surviving
difficult times and challenging
adversity.
Barbara De Angelis
“I lose my temper,but it’s all
over in a minute,said the
student.“So is the hydrogen
bomb,”I replied.But think of the
damage it produces!”
George Sweeting
There is a great deal of
unmapped country within us
which would have to be taken
into account in an explanation
of our gusts and storms.
George Eliot

<<<PAGE 141>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
118
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INDIAN GIRL INTRODUCES
HER COLLEGE BOYFRIEND TO HER
ASSEMBLED TRIBE
Commentary: ‘An Indian Girl Introduces Her College Boyfriend
to Her Assembled Tribe’ is an image of the spanning of cultures,
languages or belief systems through love and acceptance. The
people in this Symbol are bridging the gap between people or
situations that are usually foreign to each other. They may come
from completely different “sides of the tracks”. However, it is the
deeply felt understanding of both camps, intellectual and tribal,
and the respect with which these people are held that makes their
mutual acceptance possible. It may be that having an education
creates a gap between those that have formal training and those
that haven’t. This Symbol can also refer to generation gaps. Despite
any differences in the way a family or close group may see the
world, there should always be the essential elements of family,
respect and pride shown to those who come.
Oracle: It is by ‘Introducing’ new people, those that are outside
our usual intimate circle, whether it be family, community (or
tribe), or even our business world, that the potential of our lives
is expanded. The motivation for this change, or challenge, to
the status quo is love and the willingness to accept things that
are normally foreign to us. There may be all kinds of intellectual
disputes or stubborn resistance to new people or ways of life,
but these will be welcomed when the there is a motivation for
acceptance. It is in both the giving and seeking of acceptance
that we show a wise heart, even in the face of surface or social
difficulties. If there are hurdles or barriers around you, persevere.
These can, and will, evaporate with time as people’s ideas soften
through becoming familiar with each other. With persistent love
and openness, barriers can be overcome.
Keywords: Challenging or going against the status quo. Bringing
in a new, more intellectual, element OR bringing in a more natural,
earth-based attitude. Being the odd one out. Revealing strange,
foreign situations or truths to others. Accepting people without
judgment. Being welcoming and loving. Clans. Tribes.
TheCaution: Deliberately upsetting the group. Unconventional or
alternative behavior. Choosing friends or mates that could never fit
in with one’s family, friends or social expectations. Using prejudice
to keep people apart. Judging people by social standards. People
misunderstanding each other. Hidden motives. Rebellion for the
sake of being different. Ignoring tradition.
Cancer 28
For that reason,if no other,
Would I wed the fair Dacotah,
That our tribes might be
united,That old feuds might be
forgotten,And old wounds be
healed forever.
HenryWadsworth Longfellow
Winston Churchill was not
entirely British.His mother was
American,making SirWinston
part Iroquois Indian.
Rachel Blanchard
It is a common enough case,
that of a man being suddenly
captivated by a woman nearly
the opposite of his ideal.
George Eliot
It is the mark of an educated
mind to be able to entertain a
thought without accepting it.
Aristotle
Differences challenge
assumptions.
AnneWilson Schaef
Honest differences are often
a healthy sign of progress.
Mahatma Gandhi
Ideological differences are no
excuse for rudeness.
Judith Martin
What sets worlds in motion is
the interplay of differences,their
attractions and repulsions;life
is plurality,death is uniformity.
Octavio Paz

<<<PAGE 142>>>
CANCER
Y
119
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GREEK MUSE WEIGHING NEW
BORN TWINS IN GOLDEN SCALES
Commentary: ‘A Greek Muse Weighing New Born Twins in
Golden Scales’. The ‘Muses’ were Greek deities of the arts and
sciences. Artists and scientists alike would invoke the wisdom
and inspiration of the 'Muses' before any creative or intellectual
work was begun. In Greek mythology there are nine ‘Muses’ that
specialize in different aspects of thought and creativity.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, you may be pressed into
making judgments and decisions in a creative or intuitive way. As
the ‘Greek Muse’ is ‘Weighing New Born Twins’, the elements of
your judgment are likely to be, in many ways, very similar. The
choices are confusing because they essentially lead to the same
result.This situation is probably brand new. It may be that the
answer lies in taking an intuitive “punt”, or guess, or perhaps you
need to wait for more information for the solutions to become
more clear-cut. Either way it is by consulting universal wisdom
that you can focus on the best answer. Are you consulting the right
‘Muse’? Are you considering the issue from the best perspective?
This is, overall, a very fortunate Symbol – it indicates that your
choices are equally beneficial, or at least, equally balanced.
Whatever you decide will most likely be a good decision. This
Symbol can also indicate a very quick mind that can make
decisions very quickly due to a natural mechanism that can be
called on.
Keywords: Comparisons and similarities. Weighing things up.
The law and lawyers. The Scales of Justice. First communion. The
value of new beginnings. Grand gestures. Ceremonies. Looking
for subtle aspects. Balances. Using the intuition. Weighing
up pros and cons. Hesitating before making decisions. Subtle
discriminations of differences. Measured responses. Inspiration.
The gift of prophecy. Patrons of the arts. Ponder. Fairness.
Equality. Meticulous attention to detail. Evaluations.
The Caution: Expressing judgmental opinions about things that
are essentially equal. Being picky. The scales tipped. Everything
getting off balance. Constantly weighing things up instead of just
accepting them. Not being able to move forward with plans or
ideas because of a feeling of being stuck. Excessive arguments
for or against. Continual wavering. Being persnickety. Tipping
the scales.
Cancer 29
Perfection is reached not when
there is no longer anything to
add,but when there is no longer
anything to take away.
Antoine de Saint Exupery
It is in your moments of
decision that your destiny is
shaped.
Anthony Robbins
Jury:Twelve people who
determine which client has the
better lawyer.
Robert Frost
He is no lawyer who cannot
take two sides.
Charles Lamb
The margin is narrow,but the
responsibility is clear.
John F.Kennedy
The wise weigh their words on a
scale with gold.
The Bible
Rare is the person who can
weigh the faults of others
without putting his thumb on
the scales.
Byron J.Langenfield
Spend time every day listening
to what your muse is trying to
tell you.
Saint Bartholomew
Choice—It is always your next
move.
Napoleon Hill

<<<PAGE 143>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Y
120
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A DAUGHTER OF THE AMERICAN
REVOLUTION
Commentary: ‘A Daughter of the American Revolution’ is an image
of someone who stands for and is a product of change. She has
promoted and adopted the changes that the ‘Revolution’ sought to
achieve. ‘The American Revolution’, was a full-scale militant revolt
against tradition, and the monarchy behind it. The ‘Daughters’’
forefathers fought for independence and took the “feudal system”
head-on. The ‘Daughers’ stand for maintaining what has been
won. They need to continue working and, although the war has
largely been won, there are many more “peaceful” battles that
must be waged to keep what the ‘Revolution’ fought for. They are
not necessarily engaged in direct political or military activity, but
offer their support to the powers that be. The alliance of their
fathers’ political stance may be largely determined by their personal
relationship to them, rather than their own political beliefs.
Oracle: A ‘Revolution’ is just the shakeup; it is the ‘Daughters’
(and sons) of the ‘Revolution’ that bring new ways into the world.
The person pictured here is said to be a ‘Daughter’ because the
way of continuing the revolution is with the feminine ways of
communication, example and teaching. The ways of the “sons”,
that of war and fighting, should be over and done with. That is,
unless a battle needs to be fought to secure freedom from external
forces once again. You may find yourself having to stand up for an
ideal or a situation that demands your involvement. The difficulty
is that these traditions are now predictable, conservative values.
Despite any inner feelings of modern freedom, this is not how the
situation now appears. However, although this image can be very
conservative, there can be an element of the “radical” within it.
There still may be much yet to be achieved even though there has
been major breakthroughs already.
Keywords: Being bound by social conditioning OR leading the
charge to break down the barriers of tradition. Putting in the time
to change social conditions for the betterment of all. The feminist
movement. Sacrificing personal conviction to ambition. Sacrificing
philosophy to a relationship that builds the ego. Inherited values.
Being the rebel in the family.
The Caution: Supporting battles that have already been fought.
False feelings of superiority. Having to be “in the club” to be
accepted. Narrow-minded conservatism. Glorifying the past.
Relying on old traditions that were, in their day, radical and
transforming. Rejecting one’s inheritance.
Cancer 30
The greatest glory of a freeborn
people is to transmit that
freedom to their children.
William Harvard
The hand that rocks the cradle
rules the nation and its destiny.
South African Proverb
A citizen of America will
cross the ocean to fight for
democracy,but won’t cross
the street to vote in a national
election.
BillVaughan
Dear Mr.President,There are
too many states nowadays.
Please eliminate three.
P.S.I am not a crackpot.
Abraham Simpson
It is easy to take liberty for
granted when you have never
had it taken from you.
M.Grundler
Those who make peaceful
revolution impossible will make
violent revolution inevitable.
John F.Kennedy
They want to be free and they
do not know how to be just.
Abbe Sieyes
Seek not to change the world,
but choose to change your
mind about the world.
A Course In Miracles

<<<PAGE 144>>>
LEO
U
121
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
UNDER EMOTIONAL STRESS,BLOOD
RUSHES TO A MAN’S HEAD
Commentary: ‘Under Emotional Stress, Blood Rushes To a Man’s
Head’ is what happens when a situation arises which fires up one’s
mind and emotions quickly and suddenly. This can lead to anger, but
it can also lead to being stuck in a sequence of emotional reactions.
If this ‘Emotional Stress’ proves to be embarrassing, it can lead to
blushing, which can be hard to conceal.
Oracle: There may be nothing that can be done at the moment. It’s
like being immobilized with neither mental nor physical control.
Resistancemayjustmakethesituationworse.Don’tpanic,though—
this will not last forever. When emotions or ambitions take over
there is a need to put extra energy into thinking everything through
with a calm frame of mind. However, when you’re under ‘Stress’ it is
often difficult, if not impossible, to settle down and think rationally.
When temper erupts it works against the mind from settling down.
If you restrict or ignore your frustrations and anxieties your situation
could blow out of control. It is important to recognize whether
you’re reacting to a situation because it bothers you, or whether it’s
because you’re generally going through a stressful time. Be careful
not to explode every time you are under some kind of duress, as
this can create a “cranky” type of person who is unbearable unless
circumstances are smooth and calm. At the very least it is important
to notice what the underlying problems are that are bringing things
to a head. What is the real problem? If someone explodes every time
there is some emotional stress it can become a habit. Consequently,
familyandfriendstiptoearoundinanefforttokeepthingscalm.This
leads to everyone internalizing their anger and frustration, and the
problem is projected onto those around. Try to not to take things,
or yourself, too seriously. It may take some time to take the energy
out of the charge. Meditation or “getting away from it all” could be
a solution.
Keywords: Ambition. Becoming fired-up. Charging off in all
directionsatonce.Dizzinessanddisorientation.Nervousbreakdowns.
Not acting like one’s usual self. Events coming to a head. Feeling like
one will explode at any moment. Too many obligations to live up to.
Feeling incapable of action. Too much excitement to contain safely.
Headaches. Blood pressure. Erections. Animal passions.
The Caution: Becoming ill through emotional suppression. Losing
one’scool.Goingoffthedeepend.Lackofself-restraint.Takingthings
tooseriously.Grumpinessandirritability.Notknowinghowtoactor
respond. Difficulty containing emotional reactions. Unable to make
accurate decisions due to irrational thoughts. Sunburn.
Leo 1
It doesn’t pay to say too much
when you are mad enough to
choke.For the word that stings
the deepest is the word that
is never spoke.Let the other
fellow wrangle till the storm
has blown away,then he’ll do
a heap of thinking about the
things you didn’t say.
JamesWhitcomb Riley
When anger rises,think of the
consequences.
Confucius
Anger is a short madness.
Romanian Proverb
Perhaps there is only one
cardinal sin:impatience.
Because of impatience we are
driven out of Paradise;because
of impatience we cannot return.
Franz Kafka
It’s Been Lovely But I HaveTo
Scream Now.
Bumper Sticker
The ruling passion,be it what it
will,the ruling passion conquers
reason still.
Alexander Pope
How forcible are right words!
But what doth your arguing
reprove?
The Bible

<<<PAGE 145>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
122
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EPIDEMIC OF MUMPS
Commentary: ‘An Epidemic of Mumps’ can indicate a situation,
illness or event that is affecting a number of people. An ‘Epidemic’
is something contagious, like an illness that is racing throughout
the populace or raging through a chain of friends or family.
Although it can affect people on a large scale, it may have started
with just one person. The disease ‘Mumps’ can lead to sexual
impotence, in men it can literally happen, and a feeling of being
ineffectual and useless. As it is an 'Epidemic', it will pay to nip it
in the bud. It may, however, have to run its course.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, this Symbol can talk about
the literal spread of disease, but it can also symbolize news or
gossip, e.g., a story that’s gotten completely out of control. This
“infecting influence” could be affecting you or someone else in
the group, and it is likely to be spreading regardless of whether
anybody wants it to. This situation, or “disease”, needs to be
harnessed as soon as possible, as this ‘Epidemic’ may spread fear
or upset to all those involved and further afield. The situation may
indeed get worse before it gets better. Finding the origin of the
“infection”, or the extent of it’s spread or how far it has reached
will go a long way to resolving the situation. It can at least act to
slow it down so it can lose energy and dissipate. Therefore it can
be important to discover the facts about how or when it started,
or perhaps how best to stop it. There may be a need for some
kind of separation or isolation, and then some time for recovery.
Remember that laughter can be infectious. Spread joy and love
instead of fear and worry!
Keywords: Hysterical feelings. Ideas of immunity. Things getting
out of control. Common threads that link people and places.
Infectious diseases. Medicine and cures. Discovering the truth of
a situation and acting accordingly. Viruses and bacterial infections
spreading. Rumors. Colds. Flu. Fear in general. The cat let out
of the bag. The need for 'immunization'. The need for hygeine.
Isolating causes of problems. Vaccinations. Outbreaks. Blood
tests. Tumors. Measles. Chicken pox.
The Caution: Fear of bad health. Hypochondria. Rampaging
gossip. Widespread fear or upset. Stories that get out of control.
Rashes and skin problems. Deprivation. Hiding one’s self away for
fear of contagion. Fear of sharing one’s self with others. Obsession
with health. Embarrassment. Impotence. Contagious thoughts.
Negative thinking and compulsive actions. The complications
of disease. Media frenzies. Problems that multiply with alarming
speed.
Leo 2
Thought is an infection.In the
case of certain thoughts,it
becomes an epidemic.
Wallace Stevens
As contagion of sickness makes
sickness,contagion of trust can
make trust.
Marianne Moore
My sources are unreliable,but
their information is fascinating.
Ashleigh Brilliant
We are more apt to catch
the vices of others than their
virtues,as disease is far more
contagious than health.
Charles Caleb Colton
Good,the more communicated,
more abundant grows.
John Milton
A lie can run around the world
before the truth can get its
boots on.
JamesWatt
A lie gets halfway around the
world before the truth has a
chance to get its pants on.
SirWinston Churchill
Life is a disease;and the only
difference between one man
and another is the stage of
the disease at which he lives.
You are always at the crisis:I
am always in the convalescent
stage.
George Bernard Shaw

<<<PAGE 146>>>
LEO
U
123
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MATURE WOMAN,KEEPING UP
WITH THE TIMES,HAVING HER HAIR
BOBBED
Commentary: ‘A Mature Woman’ here is ‘Keeping Up With the
Times’ through having a modern hairstyle; she’s ‘Having Her Hair
Bobbed’. She doesn’t want to be out of touch with fashion and
considered old-fashioned. Getting her ‘Hair Bobbed’ helps her
to present an image of being modern and in tune with what’s
current in the world. As she’s said to be ‘A Mature Woman’, the
hairstyle may be her way of making a statement that with the
changes that are happening in her life she’s feeling somewhat
different about herself. When the Symbols were brought through
in 1925, it was, indeed, thought rather radical to cut your hair in
a ‘Bob’ if you were a woman.
Oracle: Although we cannot really become different by changing
our appearance, feeling good about the image we display does
radiate both inwardly and outwardly. This might be just what is
needed in the situation that brought you to the Oracle. However,
as comforting and rejuvenating as an external change may be,
remember that it is your inner self that is the essence of your
persona, not the mask you wear. Altering your appearance just
for the sake of being trendy may be detrimental to your self-
esteem or confidence; you may feel as though you are constantly
following the crowd. ‘Keeping Up With the Times’ can sometimes
become an obsession. Be sure that you are not making these
cosmetic changes to replace something lacking inside. Having said
that, asserting your right to present your own style and feeling
confident about yourself can be invaluable for self-esteem and
can lead to others appreciating you for your true qualities.
Keywords: Making an effort to keep up with trends. Asserting
one’s independence from social constraints. Wanting to shrug off
the years. Adopting a younger attitude. Following the herd. Going
along with the fashions. Plastic surgery. Changing appearances.
Hairdressers and hairstyles. Gray hair. Hats and scarves. Meeting
the challenges of age. Radiating sexuality. Bad hair days. Mid-life
crisis. Being a trendsetter.
The Caution: Relying on external fashion to disguise inner
emptiness. Cosmetic changes that are transitory. Making
superficial but not meaningful alterations. Fashion slaves.
The illusion of keeping up with the times. Giving up on one’s
appearance. Battling society’s glorification of youth. Mutton
dressed up as lamb.
Leo 3
You can’t make the Duchess
ofWindsor into Rebecca of
Sunnybrook Farm.
Cleveland Amory
You’re only as good as your last
haircut.
Susan Lee
My concern today is not with
the length of a person’s hair but
with his conduct.(On campus
radicals)
Richard Milhouse Nixon
When a woman ceases to alter
the fashion of her hair,you
guess that she has passed the
crisis of her experience.
Mary Austin
By common consent gray hairs
are a crown of glory;the only
object of respect that can never
excite envy.
George Bancroft
A mode of conduct,a standard
of courage,discipline,fortitude
and integrity can do a great
deal to make a woman
beautiful.
Jacqueline Bisset
A truth looks freshest in the
fashions of the day.
Lord AlfredTennyson
Some never choose an opinion.
They just wear whatever
happens to be in fashion.
LeoTolstoy

<<<PAGE 147>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
124
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN FORMALLY DRESSED
STANDS NEAR TROPHIES HE
BROUGHT BACK FROM A HUNTING
EXPEDITION
Commentary: ‘A Man Formally Dressed Stands Near Trophies’
is an image of someone putting on their best attire and showing
something that’s seen by himself and others as being a reward for
achieving success in a male dominated arena. These are ‘Trophies
He Brought Back From a Hunting Expedition’ and they are his to
display or show off. It can be something he’s found, fought, shot
or “bagged” in some way. It’s safe to assume that he’s very proud
of his success and he may have had to endure incredible stress and
dangers to acquire it. Whatever the ‘Trophies’ are, it is one thing
to achieve them and another to then display these achievements
for all to see.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that there may be the urge, or the need,
to impress others. There should always be some form of recognition
or award for a job well done. Being proud and having a sense of
satisfaction for accomplishing something should be awarded and
congratulated. But just what are the rewards and spoils that you’re
after? Some people will be pleased with the display, but there’s the
possibility of some being uninterested and further, others could
be distinctly unimpressed. Think carefully of the effects before
you do anything as others may feel jealous or try to shoot you
down for showing off. The ‘Trophies’ can be diplomas and awards
for performing well on any level. Have you truly accomplished
something? If so you should be acknowledged and congratulated,
OR, are they just “things” that you can claim for yourself without
considering where they’ve come from or caring about what had to
be done to achieve them?
Keywords: Trophies of conquest. The desire to show oneself.
Proving one’s animal instincts for the benefit of social position.
Displays of manliness. The spoils of daring and courage. Notches
on the belt. Victories over another. Trophies awarded for one’s club,
social standing or country. Looking for pats on the back. Diplomas.
Guns, rifles, ammunition. Academy Awards. Animal liberationists.
TheCaution: Dominating nature with power. Showing off. Warfare
and the ravages of it. Keeping tabs on one’s conquests. Boasting of
masculine prowess. Living in the past. Arrogance. Seeing things as
objects to conquer. Testosterone overloads. Compromises made to
attain social acceptance. Envious responses to success.
Leo 4
Lots of people who complained
about us receiving the MBE
received theirs for heroism in
the war—for killing people.We
received ours for entertaining
other people.I’d say we deserve
ours more.
John Lennon
There’s always something
about your success that
displeases even your best
friends.
MarkTwain
One nice thing about egotists:
they don’t talk about other
people.
Lucille S.Harper
I don’t deserve this award,but
I have arthritis,and I don’t
deserve that,either.
Jack Benny
He who doesn’t risk never gets
to drink champagne.
Russian Proverb
A sportsman is a man who,
every now and then,simply has
to get out and kill something.
Not that he’s cruel.He wouldn’t
hurt a fly.It’s not big enough.
Stephen Leacock
The English country gentleman
galloping after a fox—the
unspeakable in full pursuit of
the uneatable.
OscarWilde

<<<PAGE 148>>>
LEO
U
125
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
ROCK FORMATIONS TOWERING
OVER A DEEP CANYON
Commentary: ‘Rock Formations Towering Over a Deep Canyon’
is an image of large prominences of rock forming a steep
precipice over a canyon, valley or gorge. The landscape can be
very formidable, awe-inspiring and rather off-putting, making
one feel very small and somehow insignificant when observing
it. We are reminded of the enormity of nature and how small we
truly are in the grand scheme of things.
Oracle: Things may have been smooth sailing for some time,
but now you could be finding yourself trapped between a rock
and a hard place. It’s likely that the natural structure of your
situation has carefully grown and developed over time. There
is a history here, but this is only recognizable by the obvious
emotional and physical effects that are shown around you in the
world. The soft spots have been worn away; and many of the
hard edges have been smoothed under the weight of the weather
and experience. Right now progress is at a precipice, with the
structures of the past pressing from behind. There seems to be no
going back—forward is probably the only way out. There may be
a feeling of being unable to cope out in the wilderness. The best,
or possibly only, solution may be to “jump into the void”. It may
be a lonely journey, but you will find new depths of experience
that you could only have imagined before now. Be wary though,
another side to this Symbol can indicate instability – the ‘Rock
Formations’ that ‘Tower Over the ‘Deep Canyon’ are not going
to be stable forever. They are at the mercy of the elements; we
can’t rely on these formations forever. The situation may look
rock solid, but time may tell a different story.
Keywords: Old structures and deep hazards. The choice: taking
chances or standing still. Walking very close to the edge. Extreme
sports. Risk taking. New takes on old situations. Additions to
things long established. Masada. Mountains. Valleys and gorges.
Fortifications. Isolation. The grandeur of nature. The forces of
evolution. Rock. Geology. Layers of permanence. Landscapes.
Canyons. Vertigo. No going back. Stability behind—the unknown
in front. Great heights. Monuments.
The Caution: Painting oneself into a corner. Not being able to
retrace one’s steps. Instability. Erosion. Jumping into the void
without a safety net. Cracks appearing. Doing a “Geronimo”. Being
right on the edge. Feeling like life is impossibly hard.
Leo 5
When you look long into an
abyss,the abyss looks into you.
Friedrich Nietzsche
Do the thing you fear and the
death of fear is certain.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Look twice before you leap.
Charlotte Bronte
When one must,one can.
Yiddish Proverb
You’ve got to jump off cliffs all
the time and build your wings
on the way down.
Ray Bradbury
The greatest mistake a man can
make is to be afraid of making
one.
Elbert Hubbard
Man can learn nothing except
by going from the known to the
unknown.
Claude Bernard
When you fall into a pit,either
you get out or die.
Chinese Proverb
A journey of a thousand miles
starts in front of your feet.A
tower nine stories high is built
from a small heap of earth.
Lao-Tzu
Drive a rat into a corner,and
he'll jump at you.
Proverb

<<<PAGE 149>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
126
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD FASHIONED CONSERVATIVE
WOMAN IS CONFRONTED BY AN
UP-TO-DATE GIRL
Commentary: ‘An Old Fashioned Conservative Woman is
Confronted by an Up-to-Date Girl’. They have somehow been
brought together by a situation or circumstance and are now
face-to-face with each other. The ‘Old-Fashioned Conservative
Woman’ may feel somehow ‘Confronted’ or challenged by the
presence or the very existence of the ‘Up-to-Date Girl’. The
‘Girl’ may remind her of how she used to be, or how she always
wanted to be. The ‘Up-to-Date Girl’ may be confronted by the
‘Conservative Woman’—she may have her own sense of inferiority,
or even superiority, and many things may run through her mind as
she sees herself reflected in the older woman. One of the scariest
things to young people is the thought of aging. They like to believe
they will remain young and bright forever.
Oracle: This Symbol often shows issues of the aging process being
a positive experience, rather than the negative image people
generally have of it. The ‘Old Fashioned Woman’ or the ‘Up-to-
Date Girl’ do not have to stick to their stereotype; they can, indeed,
bring the best of both worlds together. In fact, their roles may be
reversed with the ‘Older’ woman being less 'Conservative' than the
‘Younger’ one. You may find yourself faced with a choice between
tried and true established ways and the modern or innovative. It
is most likely that the best qualities of both attitudes is the proper
compromise. There may be a need to be mindful of other people’s
mindsets and generational differences. However, you can’t please
everyone all the time. Also, remember what bothers people about
someone else is often a reflection of their own issues.
Keywords: Conservatism challenged by changing, energetic forms.
Learning to let one’s hair down. Letting go and having a good
time. Issues of age and what one’s capable of. Ideas challenged.
Learning experiences. Renovations. Business takeovers. Different
capabilities and talents. People acting or working together
regardless of their differences. Generation gaps. Concentrating.
Face to face meetings.
The Caution: Denying the duality within. Being afraid to get
out there. Jealousy between people on different levels of being
or different ages. Paying no attention to change/being afraid of
it. Difficult combinations of people. Projection of the shadow.
Standoffs. Criticism. Derision, envy, fear, jealousy. Age overriding
feelings.
Leo 6
To live lightheartedly but
not recklessly;to be gay
without being boisterous;to
be courageous without being
bold;to show trust and cheerful
resignation without fatalism—
this is the art of living.
Jean de La Fontaine
I used to be with‘it’,but then
they changed what‘it’was.Now
what I’m with isn’t‘it’anymore
and what’s‘it’seems weird and
scary.
Abraham Simpson
No idea is so antiquated that it
was not once modern;no idea
is so modern that it will not
someday be antiquated.
Ellen Glasgow
The virtue of some people
consists wholly in condemning
the vices in others.
Herbert Samuel
It is only the modern that ever
becomes old-fashioned.
OscarWilde
It’s hard for me to get used to
these changing times.I can
remember when the air was
clean and sex was dirty.
George Burns
Women dress alike all over
the world:they dress to be
annoying to other women.
Elsa Schiaparelli

<<<PAGE 150>>>
LEO
U
127
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE WONDER OF THE
CONSTELLATIONS OF STARS IN THE
NIGHT SKY
Commentary: ‘The Wonder of the Constellations of Stars in the
Night Sky’ brings to mind the amazing sense of beauty that can
be felt when observing the heavens. Just as our ancestors saw
pictures in the 'Stars', a ‘Constellation’ is an expression of how
our imagination can see designs and symbols in things that we
usually take for granted. ‘The Night Sky’ can create images that
inspire us to greater awareness. Questions such as “what am I
here for?” “what is life really about?” and “what difference do I
(or can I) make to this world?”, etc. can come up as we gaze at
the heavens. The clearer the sky and the darker the night, the
more we can feel drawn to that vast space and are held in awe of
it. Nature can often show us how “small” we are in the universe,
and yet how important we are to “the whole”.
Oracle: The bigger questions are likely to be in your mind at
the moment. Simple issues will be viewed against a backdrop of
something greater. This helps to keep your life in perspective.
This Symbol is about the need to see the patterns in what is going
on around you. Rather than looking at each thing separately,
step back and see the wider view—allow your imagination and
intuition to create an inspiring vision that gives answers and
direction to your life. Sometimes individual events have no more
importance than to act as cogs in a wheel of a broader, more
inspirational message. Looking at the sky can induce wonder at
life’s possibilities. The 'Stars' are so far away, yet they feel large and
close when the sky is clear and dark. Try to get out and observe
the 'Night Sky'. This can help to bring a sense of wonder and awe
into your life and remind you of the beauty of our universe.
Keywords: Reminders of the patterns, integration and enormity
of nature. The big picture. Observing signatures. A determination
to “be somebody”. The Stars and Stripes. Feeling like a tiny fleck
against the backdrop of the vault of the sky. Space travel and
its wonders. Signs from the heavens. Answers sought through
astrology. Astronomy. Being a shining star. Enormous people or
personalities.
The Caution: Ignoring down-to-earth issues. Missing the small
details. Only being amazed by huge things and not seeing wonder
in the small things in life. Being starstruck and not seeing the
true picture.
Leo 7
Watch the stars and from
them learn.To the Master’s
honor all must turn,Each in its
track,without a sound,Forever
tracing Newton’s ground.
Albert Einstein
As soon as man does not
take his existence for granted,
but beholds it as something
unfathomably mysterious,
thought begins.
Albert Schweitzer
The purpose of life is the
investigation of the sun,
the moon,and the heavens.
Anaxagoras
A person should contemplate
the workings of the
universe with reverence and
introspection.In this way
expression is given to the effects
of these laws upon his own
person.This is the source of a
hidden power.
I Ching
I’m astounded by people who
want to know the Universe.It’s
hard enough to find your way
around Chinatown.
Woody Allen
Anyone informed that the
universe is expanding and
contracting in pulsations of
eighty billion years has a right
to ask,“What’s in it for me?”
Peter DeVries

<<<PAGE 151>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
128
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ACTIVIST IS STIRRING UP
DISCONTENT BY SPREADING HIS
REVOLUTIONARY IDEALS
Commentary: ‘An Activist is Stirring up Discontent by Spreading
his Revolutionary Ideals’. He has had some enlightening or
disturbing insight into what’s going on in society. He wants people
to listen to his message and, probably, influence or change their
way of thinking. The ‘Activist’ feels that he has the answers to
how life should really be and what rights people are entitled to.
To some people, his beliefs, or his radical ways, may be somewhat
confronting and threatening to their everyday lives. To others,
his ‘Ideals’ may fit with what they’ve wanted in their own lives;
he can be a beacon calling out for action. His message can be
challenging, stirring or misleading.
Oracle: Society often looks down on those who have bright and
burning ideas of 'Revolution', when in reality they should perhaps
be thanked for having the vision, or foresight, to see the need for
it. On the other hand, somebody may be forcing their ideas on
others – what one person thinks is not always right for others.
And, of course, ‘Activists’ are not always spreading useful, or
practical, ideas. They can be extremist and unrealistic. Striving
for the ideals of equality for all tends to be more relevant to
those in a disadvantaged position. Those who live safely within
the comfort of society rarely rebel against what’s happening;
however, there are exceptions to this. There may indeed be the
need for a change to the status quo. This must come from someone
who is prepared to sacrifice personal comfort in order to remain
true to his or her ideals fighting for the common good. You may
feel that you have had enough of the situation and that you have
no power. If so, you probably need to enlist the support of others
if you wish to succeed. It is through the promise of equality that
power will be won.
Keywords: Unwavering and unbending intellect. Burning
passions. Revolutionary ideals. Change for the sake of change.
Making one’s ideas and passions known. Standing on a
soapbox. Greenpeace and other radical groups. Anti-capitalism.
Entrepreneurs. Working hard to wake others up. Challenging
authority. Demonstrations. Placards. Rejecting oppression.
Soapboxes.
The Caution: Political brainwashing. Finding things to be
dissatisfied with. Extremism. Religious fundamentalists. Street
preachers. Cult leaders. Terrorism. Breeding hate. Challenging
powerful institutions. Propaganda. Animosity.
Leo 8
If you don’t stand for
something,you will fall for
anything.
Chinese Proverb
A man may be poorly dressed
and penniless,yet his burning
desire can bring him the
opportunity of his lifetime.
E Barnes
There is nothing more difficult
to take in hand,more perilous
to conduct or more uncertain in
its success than to take the lead
in the introduction of a new
order of things.
Niccolo Machiavelli
The people must fight for
their laws as for their walls.
Heraclitus
The first duty of a revolutionist
is to get away with it.
Abbie Hoffman
I hate the idea of causes,and
if I had to choose between
betraying my country and
betraying my friend,I hope I
should have the guts to betray
my country.
E.M.Forster
A man is sometimes lost in the
dust of his own raising.
David Ruggles
All movements go too far.
Bertrand Russell

<<<PAGE 152>>>
LEO
U
129
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
GLASS BLOWERS SHAPE BEAUTIFUL
FORMS WITH THEIR CONTROLLED
BREATHING
Commentary: ‘Glass Blowers’ are shaping ‘Beautiful Forms With
Their Controlled Breathing’. They have to be craftsmen of their
art in order to be able to make the forms ‘Beautiful’. They must
take care and work with precision to have their ‘Glass’ objects take
shape and be pleasing to the eye. When Venetian 'Glass Blowers'
made a mistake in creating fine bottles they called them a fiasco.
‘Their Controlled Breathing’ can almost be like a meditation, with
every ‘Breath’ and every movement being important to the final
result.
Oracle: This Symbol is about understanding the spiritual flow
involved in creativity. It is also about the wonderful things that
can be done when one has a great depth of understanding of what
one wants to achieve. It can also signify the things we might leave
behind that symbolize or act as reminders of significant moments
of our lives. These memories are fragile and dependent upon how
well they are cared for. Your inner spiritual energies can shape
your situation into something worthwhile now. It is only with the
controlled use of these energies that you will actually be able to
craft this situation correctly. It is important, however, for you to let
go of any fears that what you do may not last. It is the act of creating
something beautiful, from the heart and soul, that is the point of our
participation in life. Be careful not to let your imagination get out of
control; the mind can be responsible for warping reality to fit our
thoughts. Connecting with the unknown depths of unconscious
experience is often reliant upon the control of ‘Breath’. Practicing
breathing meditations and learning about diaphragm control can
take one’s whole existence onto a new level of being. Watching
what you breathe life into can be very illuminating. Focus on what
you’re creating with your life. Are you ‘Shaping Beautiful Forms’
with your creations?
Keywords: Being able to create beautiful forms out of nothing.
Prana. Singing, performing. Buteyko breathing method. Sculpture.
Beauty. Breath meditations. Artisans. Rebirthing. Extreme care and
detail. Lungs. Respiration = creation and inspiration. Pouring life
into creative visions. Smoke rings. Didgeridoos. Smoking pipes
and implements.
TheCaution: Failing to take proper care. Lapses of concentration.
Distortions of the truth. Hyperventilation. Lung troubles. Asthma.
Smoking too much.
Leo 9
As the same fire assumes
different shapes,when it
consumes objects differing in
shape,so does the one self take
the shape of every creature in
whom he is present.
Upanishads
Anger is an acid that can do
more harm to the vessel in which
it is stored than to anything on
which it is poured.
Anon
The greath becomes a stone;
the stone,a plant;the plant,
an animal;the animal,a man,
a spirit;and the spirit,a god.
Christian Nestell Bovee
Courage is a matter of the red
corpuscle.It is oxygen that
makes every attack;without
oxygen in his blood to back
him,a man attacks nothing—
not even a pie,much less a
blank canvas.
Elbert Hubbard
The artist is nothing without
the gift,but the gift is nothing
without work.
Emile Zola
Every artist dips his brush in his
own soul,and paints his own
nature into his picture.
HenryWard Beecher

<<<PAGE 153>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
130
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
EARLY MORNING DEW SALUTES THE
SUNLIGHT
Commentary: ‘Early Morning Dew Salutes the Sunlight’ gives
the feeling of freshness in the air as the sun comes up in the
‘Morning’. The warmth of the Sun is yet to create the vibrancy
of the new day, but the promise is there. This is a time of limbo,
when the stillness and the darkness of night are washed away as
the day progresses into light and activity. However, this Symbol
can signify a time known as the “dark night of the soul”. St.
John of the Cross used this term to describe the experience
of mystics who feel depressed and isolated, from the world
and even from God. This was often prior to the attainment of
mystical transcendence – when the ‘Sunlight’ breaks through
and a healing takes place. This is a time of freshness where the
“air” (the newly awakened mind) is crisp and the “ground” (the
refreshed and renewed body) readies itself for a new round of
activity. The birds are stirring and there is a buzzing in the air as
all the creatures start moving about.
Oracle: There are times in our life when we wonder if we can
persevere to the end of some ordeal. After a cold and difficult
time, you may now be close to the end of your troubles and
sensing that the resolution to your problems is imminent. The
reward of relief may prove to be transitory, so enjoy it before
you move on with the activity of the new day. You may still have
some of the same issues to face, but now there is probably more
insight into what changes and shifts in attitude can be made.
Awakening energies are signaling new beginnings. Taking your
shoes off and walking on the grass in the early morning is said
to be very good for the soul.
Keywords: Refreshment after periods of “the long night of the
soul”. Dawn meditations bringing new starts and new inspiration.
Dew. Water dripping from trees. The dawning of a new day
and the relief that it can bring. Changing of the guard. Natural
progression. Inheritances. Exhalted feelings of release. Droplets
on spiderwebs.
TheCaution: Not letting go of difficult situations. Persisting with
problems that could have been solved. Feeling that the worst is
going to happen, even though things are lightening up. Being
afraid of the night. Staying up all night, being upset or unable to
sleep. Gloominess. Staying in bed well into the day. Leaving the
light on all night.
Leo 10
The darkest hour is just before
dawn.
Thomas Fuller
Let your life lightly dance on the
edges ofTime like dew on the
tip of a leaf.
RabindranathTagore
There was never a night or
a problem that could defeat
sunrise or hope.
BernWilliams
On life’s journey faith is
nourishment,virtuous deeds
are a shelter,wisdom is the light
by day and right mindfulness
is the protection by night.If a
man lives a pure life,nothing
can destroy him.
Buddha
One may not reach the dawn
save by the path of the night.
Kahlil Gibran
No one is as capable of
gratitude as one who has
emerged from the kingdom of
night.
ElieWiesel
There are twelve hours in the
day,and above fifty in the night.
Marie de Rabutin-Chantal
The morning pouring
everywhere,its golden glory on
the air.
HenryWadsworth Longfellow

<<<PAGE 154>>>
LEO
U
131
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CHILDREN ON A SWING IN THE
SAFETY OF A HUGE OAK TREE
Commentary: ‘Children on a Swing in the Safety of a Huge Oak
Tree’ brings to mind images of ‘Children’ playing, having fun
together and being protected by the big branches of the ‘Huge
Oak Tree’. ‘Oak Trees’ infer enormous strength. The ‘Oak’s’
strength, the hardness and durability of the timber, and their
long life give the Oak a special significance. In England, the Oak
has been referred to as the “Monarch of the Forest”. Cowthorpe
Oak in Yorkshire can hold 70 people in its hollow. It is said to be
over 1,600 years old. The Ellerslie Oak, near Paisley, is reported
to have sheltered Sir William Wallace and 300 of his men. Honour
Oak, Whitchurch, Tavistock was the place where money was left
in exchange for food during the cholera epidemic of 1832.
Oracle: It is easier to enjoy carefree, childlike play when one’s
‘Safety’ and care is assured. Protective environments are the
places where playgrounds can be created. In this Symbol it is the
very structure of the things around you or even your particular
location that provides the ‘Safety’ that’s needed. By the very
nature of things, safe surroundings can take care of everyone.
Institutions like the Social Security system are similar to the ‘Oak
Tree’. Religions and social organizations can also provide this
protected environment for people. In general, it is security and
protection that needs to be afforded to us for us to follow our
true path. Look for the stability and strength in your situation, and
expand your wishes and dreams into that protected environment.
This Symbol can indicate being relieved from responsibility. This
is a good time to relax into playing with others. Feel ‘Safe’ in the
knowledge that everything will remain secure. Keep in touch
with the innocence and openness of youthful play.
Keywords: Creativity in safe surroundings. Being protected
and privileged. Social security and other forms of governmental
protection. Agencies that bring food, education and basic needs to
children in difficult circumstances. Children, trees, grass, swings,
parks. Amusement parks. Childhood memories. Climbing trees.
Spontaneous activity. Humanitarian agencies. Security coming
through family. Safe confines.
TheCaution: Expecting others to take all the responsibility while
one just plays. Children not being looked after. Disadvantaged
people. Desertion by government and big business. Not wanting
to grow up. Always relying on others to provide fun, safety or
shelter.
Leo 11
I sit beneath your leaves,old oak,
You mighty one of all the trees;
Within whose hollow trunk a
man Could stable his big horse
with ease.
W.H.Davies
One that would have the fruit
must climb the tree.
Thomas Fuller
Woodman,spare that tree!
Touch not a single bough! In
youth it sheltered me,and I’ll
protect it now.
George Pope Morris
The forest laments in order that
Mr.Gladstone may perspire.
Sir Randolph Churchill
One generation plants the trees;
another gets the shade.
Chinese Proverb
Train up a fig tree in the way it
should go,and when you are old
sit under the shade of it.
Charles Dickens
Cut not the bough that thou
standest upon.
Romanian Proverb
If nuclear power plants are safe,
let the commercial insurance
industry insure them.Until these
most expert judges of risk are
willing to gamble with their
money,I’m not willing to gamble
with the health and safety of my
family.Donna Reed

<<<PAGE 155>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
132
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EVENING GARDEN PARTY OF
ADULTS
Commentary: ‘An Evening Garden Party of Adults’ is an image
of people relaxing, chatting and getting to know each other.
Enjoying time spent with friends, family or neighbors can bring
new depths to relationships and community. It can also lead to
meeting new people and the networking of ideas. Gossip often
comes up at ‘An Evening Garden Party’. People talk about each
other, swapping tales of their own and other people’s lives. As
long as it is not harmful or malicious, gossip can be a valuable
part of the weaving of society. Talking together about one’s life,
each other and, indeed, those not present, can lead to a deeper
understanding of our lives and provides the chance to catch up
on what people have been doing. Socializing and chatting is part
of the way we keep in contact with the news of the day.
Oracle: This Symbol signifies taking a much-needed break from
work. Give the rigors of your work routine a rest. Relaxation
amongst your peers, where there is no need for exuberant
pretense, can do nothing but good. Remember to live in the
moment, enjoying this time out from care and trouble. It’s
important to give time and energy to your social life as it can
refresh you and lead to new friendships and contacts. However,
too much ambition, or trying to compete with others on a social
level can make it hard to relax and truly enjoy yourself and can
alienate others. If you don’t feel that you fit in with the group,
remain composed and wait it out. You may have to put on a socially
acceptable or brave face and go along with whatever’s expected.
If this is the case, fulfill your role for the time being. It won’t be
long before you’re back in your own space again. Whatever, fill
your cup, have a bite to eat and relax with friends.
Keywords: Rising above superficiality into receptivity and
peace with others. People mixing in a social setting. Sedate
and conservative celebrations. Formal events vs. impromptu
gatherings. Gossip. Leisure time. Political correctness. Enjoying
socializing. Being a good conversationalist. Drinks and food on
platters. Knowing who to invite.
The Caution: A sense of superficiality where things are known
but not said out loud. Appearance and social standing taking on
too much importance. Ignoring real and immediate issues. Not
knowing how to act with the “adults”. Malicious gossip. Having
to face those you don’t want to see. Getting drunk and “out of
bounds”. False fronts.
Leo 12
If I shall sell both my forenoons
and afternoons to society,as
most appear to do,I’m sure that,
for me,there would be nothing
left worth living for.
Henry DavidThoreau
Ever notice that Soup For One
is eight aisles away from the
party mix?
Elayne Boosler
There is only one thing in the
world worse than being talked
about,and that is not being
talked about.
OscarWilde
Giving parties is a trivial
avocation,but it pays the dues
for my union card in humanity.
Elsa Maxwell
When Jerry Lewis and I were
big,we used to go to parties,
and everybody thought I was
big-headed and stuck up,and
I wasn’t.It was because I didn’t
know how to speak good
English,so I used to keep my
mouth shut.Dean Martin
Living in NewYork is like being
at some terrible late-night
party.You’re tired,you’ve had a
headache since you arrived,but
you can’t leave because then
you’d miss the party.
Simon Hoggart
The cocktail party is easily the
worst invention since castor oil.
Elsa Maxwell

<<<PAGE 156>>>
LEO
U
133
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD SEA CAPTAIN ROCKING ON
THE PORCH OF HIS COTTAGE
Commentary: ‘An Old Sea Captain’ is ‘Rocking on the Porch of His
Cottage’. This Symbol is an image of someone who has put a lot of
time and energy into his life’s work. He has now reached the point
where he can take time out, to rest and relax. However, being an
‘Old Sea Captain’, the love of the sea and adventure will be with
him forever. He may or may not be retired; whatever, he is taking
a break. He has a chance to get on with more domestic matters
and to seek peace and quiet ‘On the Porch of His Cottage’.
Oracle: There is a need for quiet reflection, to look back
at past experiences, especially those times that may have
seemed threatening. Take some time for a little solitude and to
contemplate the overall picture before you. When you are back
into the business of life, you will be more relaxed and have a better
idea of how you fit into the big picture. Feeling tired and reluctant
to get on with work can lead to feelings of failure and missed
opportunities. You may need to take time out to contemplate
your home and environment and how you fit in. Perhaps jotting
down your memoirs can bring the missed and more dramatic
moments back into you mind. Even if things seem quiet now, it
is probably only you holding yourself back from more exciting
adventures. The minute you feel like getting back to it, do it.
You’ll be surprised by how easy it can be to get back into the
swing of things. For now, enjoying the ‘Porch’ or the garden of
your home can lead to inner calm and quiet after many years of
work, struggles or difficulty.
Keywords: Retreating into one’s self. Reflecting. Quiet confidence.
Knowing that one can conquer life’s storms and come out wiser.
Observing life from afar. Wanting to opt out. Retirement, pensions
and pension plans. Being dismissed from one’s job. Redundancy.
The story of one's life. Memoirs. Rocking chairs and verandahs.
Contemplation. Gardening. Longing for calmer days. Letters,
diaries, photographs. Houses, cottages. Taking a break from
society.
The Caution: Ignoring what is happening in favor of memories.
Inability to get going. Disconnecting from reality. Feeling lazy.
The world owes you a living. Feeling jaded and worn out. Envying
those that are ‘”out there’” in the world. Wanting others to look
after you. Complacency. Giving in and giving up. Hangovers.
Forgetfulness. Feeling impotent. Being uninvolved. Opting out
before one's time.
Leo 13
Millions long for immortality
but do not know what to do
with themselves on a rainy
Sunday afternoon.
Susan Ertz
Praise the sea;on shore remain.
John Florio
Would you learn the secret of
the sea? Only those who brave
its dangers comprehend its
mystery!
HenryWadsworth Longfellow
Absence of occupation is not
rest.A mind quite vacant is a
mind distressed.
William Cowper
I pant for retirement and
leisure,but am doomed to
inexpressible and almost
unsupportable hurry.
Sarah Siddons
Retirement at sixty-five is
ridiculous.When I was sixty-five
I still had pimples.
George Burns
People are always asking me
when I’m going to retire.Why
should I? I’ve got it two ways—
I’m still making movies,and
I’m a senior citizen,so I can see
myself at half price.
George Burns
Alone,alone,all,all alone,alone
on a wide,wide sea!
SamuelTaylor Coleridge

<<<PAGE 157>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
134
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CHERUB-LIKE,A HUMAN SOUL
WHISPERS INTO EVERY RECEPTIVE
EAR,SEEKING TO MANIFEST
Commentary: ‘Cherub-Like, A Human Soul Whispers Into Every
Receptive Ear, Seeking to Manifest’ is a Symbol of the desire to be
heard and taken seriously. This ‘Human Soul’ is trying to find a
‘Receptive Ear’, someone who will listen to or understand what’s
being said, perhaps to spur others to take some kind of action.
Something that has been waiting to be ‘Manifested’, said, heard or
realized could come out quite suddenly.
Oracle: There is likely to be a deep realization that will transform
your life on some level. The time may not be quite right, but it is
coming soon. Your creative or spiritual talents are attempting to
come through into conscious expression. Listening to your inner
voice, and heeding messages from others, can lead you to the next
level of your life. On the spiritual level, this Symbol shows the
movement of the ‘Soul’ to new possibilities and opportunities. On
the more everyday level, it can imply that in order to find those who
wish to join our process or task, ideas need to be communicated in a
quietandsuggestivemanner,ratherthanbeingloudanddemanding.
Often when there’s a new idea in the air, many people seemingly
come up with it at the same time. This can be rather astounding; it’s
time for this new thing to ‘Manifest’ and those that are ‘Receptive’
to the message will hear and respond. However, if the messages
coming through are not clear, intelligent, or useful, it may lead to
wild-goose chases and extremes of behavior. Parts of the mind can
come tearing out – wishing to make themselves heard or known.
Discriminate between what’s important and what’s not. Listen to
messages, something is seeking expression and needs a vehicle to
be able to ‘Manifest’. Are you the “vehicle”?
Keywords: New realizations and impulses. Seeking to have
one’s voice heard. Messages from the other side. Reincarnation.
Channeling information. Spirit descending, wishing to make itself
known. Whispering. Passing on news and messages. Seeking
embodiment. Transpersonal urges. Cherubs and spirits. Ears
and hearing. The urge to accomplish something. Compassion.
Manifesting intention.
The Caution: Confusing voices. Signs of instability or madness.
Feeling that if one isn’t heard, they will miss out. A need to be
noticed and acknowledged. Not feeling like one can speak up.
Shouting and making a spectacle. Trying to convince others of
something. Misleading statements.
Leo 14
Let us be silent,that we may
hear the whispers of the gods.
RalphWaldo Emerson
For‘twas not into my ear you
whispered but into my heart;
‘twas not my lips you kissed but
my soul.
Judy Garland
In prayer,it is better to have
a heart without words than
words without heart.
Mahatma Gandhi
It is the still,small voice that the
soul heeds,not the deafening
blasts of doom.
William Dean Howells
What I like in a good author
isn’t what he says,but what he
whispers.
Logan Pearsall Smith
The strongest muscle in the
body is the tongue.
Trivia.net
Let not thy will roar when thy
power can but whisper.
Thomas Fuller
The urge for self-actualization.
Dane Rudhyar
When hearts listen,angels sing.
Anon
You called me,you shouted to
me,you broke past my defenses.
St.Augustine

<<<PAGE 158>>>
LEO
U
135
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A STREET PAGEANT MOVING ALONG
A STREET PACKED WITH PEOPLE
Commentary: The ‘Street Pageant’ is seen ‘Moving Along a Street
Packed With People’. People really enjoy a ‘Street Pageant’ or a
carnival, they get together to celebrate their community, even
if they aren’t directly involved in what’s being celebrated. Just
watching the ‘Street Pageant’ can inspire fun, joy and even a sense
of pride as people come out to watch and enjoy.
Oracle: It may be a great achievement, or an anniversary event,
that has spurred this ‘Street Pageant’. A large celebration can bring
the community together and create some type of recognition for
what has been accomplished. Most people will contribute to and
support this display and share in the festivities. However, there
will always be those who grumble about something; a lack of
parking, too much noise or garbage being strewn about. Ignore
the grumblers and go for it, you and others deserve the fun and
the rewards. You are either in the 'Pageant' or watching it—what
does it feel like to you? Are you celebrating and enjoying the fun?
Are you feeling a little out of your depth and at the mercy of the
people around you? Is there disagreement over the values of
what’s being celebrated? If things get out of hand in this situation,
you may feel like you’re pressed in and can’t get out. There can be
a feeling of being walled-in by people. Whatever is true put on a
happy and expressive face and go out and enjoy what’s going on.
If people let down their barriers, they will find it easier to relate
to others they may have never seen or interacted with before.
This can create a wonderful feeling of unity as people join in and
come together as one.
Keywords: Demonstrations of joy. Spectacular shows of solidarity.
Ticker-tape parades. Community celebrations of victory or faith.
Food and drink stalls. Mardi gras and gay pride parades. Being
a participant or an observer. Having a following. Gaiety and
spectacle. Performers, musicians, magicians. Street stalls. Traffic
management. The mob. Lots of people. Cul-de-sacs. Carnivals.
TheCaution: Egocentric displays. Blowing one’s trumpet. Closing
off some areas of life, overplaying others. Problems with neighbors
or people. Displays with little warmth or genuine communal
feelings. Feeling like sardines in a can. Noisy neighborhoods.
Loud music that annoys. Disruptive behavior. Hooligans and
louts. Looting. Lack of privacy and quiet. Garbage on the street.
Barriers between people.
Leo 15
You see someone on the street,
and essentially what you notice
about them is the flaw.
Diane Arbus
Whoever can conquer the street
will one day conquer the state,
for every form of power politics
and any dictatorship-run state
has its roots in the street.
Joseph Goebbels
The last time I saw Paris,her
heart was warm and gay,I
heard the laughter of her heart
in every street cafe.
Oscar Hammerstein
I live in a one-way deadend
street.
Bumper Sticker
Heaven is not built of
countryseats,but little queer
suburban streets.
Christopher Morley
The people that I care about
are the people out there on the
street.I can identify with them.
Diana—Princess ofWales
We learn about one another’s
culture the same way we learn
about sex:in the streets.
Ishmael Reed
Everything being a constant
carnival,there is no carnival left.
Victor Hugo

<<<PAGE 159>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
136
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
BRILLIANT SUNSHINE JUST AFTER A
STORM
Commentary: ‘Brilliant Sunshine Just After a Storm’ shows the
relief and joy that can result after a ‘Storm’ has come through,
sweeping away many of the elements that have been clogging
the environment. ‘After a Storm’ the ‘Sunshine’ can appear more
‘Brilliant’ than it usually does. In fact, the light can appear to
be rather mystical and eerie. The moisture still in the air acts
to amplify and intensify light, hence, everything around looks
more vivid and beautiful especially compared to how it seemed
during the ‘Storm’. Things that felt threatening or charged-up can
dissolve and disappear, sometimes very quickly. The remaining
“mist” of an emotional ‘Storm’ can cause intense, positive
emotions as the weather and the atmosphere clears up and the
birds start to sing again and life gets back to normal.
Oracle: This Symbol indicates a clearing of the air and the
resolving of issues that have been building up. The ‘Sunshine’
shows that the worst is probably over and at last the situation can
resolve and recovery begin. There is probably still work to be
done, but for now enjoy the release and the pleasure of renewal.
Bask in the sunlight a little and then get on with the work of
mopping or cleaning up the remnants. Another aspect of this
Symbol can show a situation that goes to and fro in extremes,
finding it hard to strike a happy medium. Perhaps you need to try
to avoid such extremes, and work on achieving a more constant
state of wellbeing. Sometimes we need sadness to fully appreciate
happiness and, vice versa. Enjoy the ‘Sunshine’ – you’ve come
through the ‘Storm’.
Keywords: The warmth of renewal. Things glistening with
raindrops. Extremes. Recovery. Hallucinogenic drugs. Extreme
weather, e.g. El Nino. Religious experiences. Brighter worlds.
Optimistic feelings after hopes dashed. Relief and joy. The sun
breaking through clouds. Overcoming crisis. The longing for rain
to quench dryness. Floods of emotion. Negative ions bringing
relief. Rainbows. Brilliant light that brings joy.
The Caution: Assuming that the storm will soon return. Being
stuck in fear. Manic depression. Distorted viewpoints. Bouncing
around from one emotion to another. Invoking arguments because
of the reward of “making up”. Enjoyment of conflict. Plumbing
problems. Refusing to move into the sunlight. Bi-polar behaviour.
On-off behaviour.
Leo 16
If we had no winter,the spring
would not be so pleasant.If
we did not sometimes taste of
adversity,prosperity would not
be so welcome.
Anne Bradstreet
Most of the shadows of this life
are caused by standing in one’s
own sunshine.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Where there is sunshine,there is
also shade.
Kashmiri Proverb
The world goes up and the
world goes down,And the
sunshine follows the rain;
And yesterday’s sneer and
yesterday’s frown,Can never
come over again.
Charles Kingsley
The hopeful man sees success
where others see failure,
sunshine where others see
shadows and storm.
O.S.Marsden
All sunshine makes the desert.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
The wise man in the storm
prays to God,not for safety
from danger,but for deliverance
from fear.
RalphWaldo Emerson
They sicken of the calm who
know the storm.
Dorothy Parker

<<<PAGE 160>>>
LEO
U
137
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
VOLUNTEER CHURCH CHOIR MAKES
SOCIAL EVENT OF A REHEARSAL
Commentary: The ‘Volunteer Church Choir’ is pictured here.
They come together to make a ‘Social Event of a Rehearsal’.
Although their voices will often hit the right pitch, sometimes
they won’t. As they are a ‘Volunteer Church Choir’, the issue is
not the quality of people's voices or being able to hold a tune, but
more the sharing of voices and the enjoyment that such gatherings
can bring. Criticism of how folks “sing” should be left at the door.
Each and every person should be encouraged to contribute what
they can, to raise his or her voice in a celebration of spiritual unity
and the enjoyment of life.
Oracle: You may feel the need to be with those of like mind,
feelings and aspirations. Take the opportunity to share in their
expression of spiritual joy and shared faith. Unified voices need
to be heard, and can uplift all that hear them. Coming together
to contribute to the community without thought of more tangible
rewards will bring a sense of belonging and fellowship on many
levels. Bringing even the smallest tokens and gifts to the gathering
will be appreciated in some way. Helpers may be required to
come to the aid of others. There may be a need to test things out
to see if they stand up to reality. Whether you receive rewards
or are paid for the work you do or not, there may be a need to
inject more fun and lightheartedness. Ultimately, if everyone is
comfortable and friendly with each other, communication and the
quality of work will improve. Even a gesture such as drinks after
work can bring people closer together. Overall, everybody should
feel happy to be around people of like mind; not pressurized to
put in a top-rate performance.
Keywords: Making the most of any situation. Feelings of
togetherness. Rehearsing without worrying about what might
happen. Doing things without thought of reward. Sharing
community. Catching up on what others are doing. Busking
and street singing. Learning to open up the throat. Charity
work. Volunteers. Sharing food and drink. Small gifts for others.
Dedication to ideals. Extending yourself by mixing in. Gatherings.
Church or school halls.
The Caution: Trivializing the purpose of gatherings. Being afraid
or reticent to lift up one’s voice. Standing in the background
because of the belief that one is not “good” enough to join in.
Criticizing others for not contributing enough. Feeling ripped
off. Issues of being "in the club".
Leo 17
We do not exist for ourselves.
Thomas Merton
You give but little when you
give of your possessions.It is
when you give of yourself that
you truly give.
Kahlil Gibran
Pooristhechurchwithoutmusic.
Irish Saying
If every American donated five
hours a week,it would equal
the labor of 20 million full-time
volunteers.
Whoopi Goldberg
The first time I sang in the
church choir;two hundred
people changed their religion.
Fred Allen
Time is important to me
because I want to sing long
enough to leave a message.
I’m used to singing in churches
where nobody would dare
stop me until the Lord arrives!
Mahalia Jackson
Please do not shoot the piano
player;he's doing the best that
he can.
Anon
The choir always tittered and
whispered all through the
service.There was once a church
choir that was not ill-bred,but I
have forgotten where it was.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 161>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
138
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHEMIST CONDUCTS AN
EXPERIMENT FOR HIS STUDENTS
Commentary: A ‘Chemist’ is shown ‘Conducting an Experiment
For His Students’. Chemistry is the manipulation of elements of
nature to create better or more valuable things. It is through our
consciousness that we manipulate our environment. Through
these efforts and the “accidents” that can happen, we come closer
to an understanding of creation and perhaps an experience of
God. The ‘Chemist’ requires the right ingredients and equipment
and his ‘Students’ need to pay attention to what he does. Still,
mistakes and miscalculations may occur. On a day-to-day basis,
we use tools such as our mind to create awareness. By teaching
people what we know, we change our understanding of the nature
of our environment. It is likely that the ‘Chemist’ has conducted
this particular ‘Experiment’ many times; still each time it can
inspire amazement and awe.
Oracle: The ‘Chemist’ can be someone who is interested in trying
something new. Even with all the appropriate credentials and
experience, there may be a feeling of being unsure of the actual
outcome. However, ‘The Chemist’ may be someone who is not
prepared to take any risks and is performing the exact same mix
of ingredients, again and again. The creative ‘Chemist’ knows that
a mix of new ingredients can lead to new creations, solutions,
observations and discoveries. You may find yourself discovering
new things in an authoritative or observant position. The message
for you in either situation, whether you are the ‘Chemist’ or a
‘Student’, is to pay attention to the small as well as the large details.
Be prepared to take a few calculated risks with this situation, it
may lead to new and satisfying solutions. Something unexpected
and exciting may happen!
Keywords: Alchemy. Stepping out of the usual rules and taking
a risk. New and untried procedures. Syllabus and education.
Wisdom being passed on. Putting things “to the test”. Throwing
out what doesn’t stand up. Ingredients. Bunsen burners. Test
tubes. Microscopes. Seeking rational answers. Science and
chemistry. Leading by example. The thrill of discovery.
The Caution: Always going “by the rules of the book” leading
to inertia and suppression of creative ideas. Being afraid to take
a chance because the situation may get out of control. Refusing
to reveal one’s formula, lest it be copied. Narrow viewpoints.
Skepticism. Being a stickler for conservative science. Not trusting
other’s abilities. Chemicals that pollute and distort.
Leo 18
Observation is a passive
science,experimentation an
active science.
Claude Bernard
Hell,there are no rules here—
we’re trying to accomplish
something.
Thomas Alva Edison
Everybody’s a mad scientist,
and life is their lab.We’re all
trying to experiment to find a
way to live,to solve problems,
to fend off madness and chaos.
David Cronenberg
A theory can be proved by
experiment;but no path leads
from experiment to the birth of
a theory.
Albert Einstein
I have nothing new to teach the
world.Truth and Nonviolence
are as old as the hills.All I have
done is to try experiments in
both on as vast a scale as I
could.
Mahatma Gandhi
I have not failed.I’ve just found
10,000 ways that won’t work.
Thomas Alva Edison
The true scientist never loses the
faculty of amusement.It is the
essence of his being.
J.Robert Oppenheimer
The fatal futility of fact.
Henry James

<<<PAGE 162>>>
LEO
U
139
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HOUSEBOAT PARTY CROWDED
WITH REVELERS;THE WATER
REFLECTS ITS LIGHTS
Commentary: A ‘Houseboat Party’ is shown. It is ‘Crowded With
Revelers’ and ‘The Water Reflects its Lights’. This pictures a need
for lightening up, relaxing and spending time with like-minded
individuals. This ‘Party’ can represent a situation where people
come together, eat, drink and share their thoughts and have a
good time. The partygoers, the ‘Revelers’, may all be enjoying
themselves and having a great time, but it may seem rather short-
lived, unstable or unreal.
Oracle: Although you are probably in a situation of definite
structure and form, you may find that it needs to be changed from
the normal routine and infused with unusual and unorthodox
possibilities. However, one problem with ‘Houseboat Parties’ is
the inability to leave when you please. When you’re socializing,
seeing a crowd of friendly faces is comforting when you have no
choice but to stay. If you are not enjoying what’s going on, it may
be that you’re stuck with people you’d really rather not associate
with. Who’s steering or in charge of the ‘Boat’ you’re on? How
long is this journey, and where will the ‘Houseboat Party’ end
up? You may feel a long way from home, and that you want to
get off. If you can relax about the situation you’re in, you may
find yourself with fabulous friends and in great surroundings.
This is often easier said than done – some people are not able
to mix with people they’re not familiar with, especially if they
feel unsure about the circumstances they find themselves in. On
a ‘Houseboat’, this can be especially true. This being said, one
does have to take risks every now and then. Enjoy the situation
to its fullest, but remember that sooner or later you will have to
get back to a more everyday, anchored life.
Keywords: Emotive social pleasure. Joining with others in an
adventurous spirit. Cleopatra-style parties. The issue of knowing
where one’s going. Claustrophobia. Being cast adrift. Delicate
social balances. Moored in water or on ground. Leisure times that
are fun and free-floating. People getting 'out of it'.
The Caution: Trapping people into ideals of pleasure. Self-
indulgence. Not knowing “where” the party is going to be or
finish up. Not being anchored in reality. Feeling “unmoored” and
unable to disembark. Nowhere to permanently dock. Unknown
destinations. Feeling trapped. Choppy seas. No one at the wheel.
Springing a leak. Wanting to bail out. Tipping the boat.
Leo 19
These three take crooked ways:
carts,boats,and musicians.
Hindu Proverb
We may have all come on
different ships,but we’re in the
same boat now.
Martin Luther King,Jr
Are we having fun yet?
Modern Saying
Are we there yet?
Modern Saying
Besides winning,the most fun
thing is getting out there and
mixing it up with friends;it’s the
competition.
Al Unser,Jr.
There are some sluggish men
who are improved by drinking;
as there are fruits that are not
good until they are rotten.
Samuel Johnson
So let's fill up our heads with
ping-pong balls and go out and
shoot the moon.
Paul Smyth
Here we are,going down
the river like Anthony and
Cleopatra on that barge.
The African Queen
Let's have one other gaudy
night:call to me all my sad
captains;fill our bowls once
more;let's mock the midnight
bell.
William Shakespeare

<<<PAGE 163>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
140
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AMERICAN INDIANS PERFORM A
RITUAL TO THE SUN
Commentary: ‘American Indians’ are pictured here ‘Performing a
Ritual to the Sun’. Twice a year, each tribe performs a Sun Dance,
a sacred ritual that is held over four days that honors grandfather
sun and the four directions. The people respect and revere both
their society and the natural environment. The warriors of the tribe
endure trials of pain and endurance to prove their strength, stamina
and ability to protect those in their care. They gather together with
kindred spirits to pay homage to the natural elements that sustain
them in their lives. They do this to get back to the natural elements;
they respond with their intuitive feelings rather than logic. In our
everyday modern lives there’s a tendency to forget to take time out
to ‘Perform’ grounding ‘Rituals’.
Oracle:The‘Sun’inthis‘Ritual’canrelatetoone’ssenseofselfhood,
identity and ego. A good, healthy sense of self and ego is wonderful
and should be celebrated. There can be a feeling of belonging to
a culture with shared visions, regardless of whether you actually
come from it. However, it is possible that someone in this situation
has been caught up in the glamor of ‘Ritual’, ignoring the true
purpose of it. Perhaps there is a need to draw the ego back into
perspective, especially if it has become over-inflated. Traditional
‘Rituals’, or ceremonies, can inspire people to action. They often
bring renewal and relief to people, and solutions to situations. Tools
like affirmations and meditation are useful to clarify goals and
ambitions. It is important, however, not to merely rely on ‘Rituals’
to magically produce what we want. Use these methods to enhance
and contribute meaning to your life. Take a moment to remember
your relationships with the earth and her people.
Keywords: Restoring spirit. Rituals and worship. The desire to
return to nature. Shining through one’s life, not through social
credentials. Sweat lodges. Drum-beating. Celebrating a unique
heritage. Participation with nature’s cycles. Eclipses. Smudging.
Reveling in the larger picture leading to belonging and oneness.
Fire, passion, spontaneity, sacrifice. Restoring sacredness. American
Indian traditions. Vision quests. Fasting. Courage. Conquering bad
habits and attitudes. The truth of conviction. Prayer. Eagle feathers.
Baptisms of fire.
TheCaution: Egoistic responses to life situations leading to narrow
responses. Relying on rituals to manifest magic. Losing sight of the
meaning of ceremony. Holding onto tradition without intuiting new
and modern truths. Living in the past. Cult worship. Losing identity
in one’s own culture. Sunstroke.
Leo 20
Life is a pure flame,and we live
by an invisible sun within us.
Thomas Browne
What is to give light must
endure burning.
Viktor Frankl
The beauty of the world and
the orderly arrangement of
everything celestial makes
us confess that there is an
excellent and eternal nature,
which ought to be worshipped
and admired by all mankind.
MarcusTullius Cicero
Hide not your talents,they
for use were made.What’s a
sundial in the shade?
Benjamin Franklin
Be glad of life because it gives
you a chance to love and to
work and to play and to look up
at stars.
HenryVan Dyke
The truest expression of a
people is in its dances and its
music.Bodies never lie.
Agnes De Mille
What is to give light must
endure the burning.
Viktor E.Frankl
An odd thing occurs in
the minds of Americans
when Indian civilization in
mentioned:little or nothing.
Paula Gunn Allen

<<<PAGE 164>>>
LEO
U
141
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
INTOXICATED CHICKENS DIZZILY
FLAP THEIR WINGS TRYING TO FLY
Commentary: ‘Intoxicated Chickens Dizzily Flap Their Wings
Trying to Fly’ is a rather amusing image. The ‘Intoxicated
Chickens’ have been fired up by something, or eaten some
seed that has become fermented. Having been ‘Intoxicated’,
they are ‘Dizzily Flapping Their Wings Trying to Fly’. They have
forgotten their true limitations and are trying to do more than
they are usually physically capable of. This Symbol can indicate
things such as giddiness, mistakes, headaches and regrets from
ill-conceived projects.
Oracle: This Symbol can indicate somebody actually losing their
sense of reality, or their sensible mind. One's first attempts at a
new experience may prove less than elegant or skillful. There is
possibly an attempt to do too much too soon. Perhaps you have
not thoroughly planned what you want to achieve. Trying to
accomplish something a little too eagerly and before the proper
training has been completed can get you nowhere, no matter
how much energy and enthusiasm is expended. Making a list of
long and short-term goals will help to clarify your ideas. Soon
things will improve and you can laugh about the mishaps and
mistakes that were made when you started out. Being confused, or
‘Intoxicated’, can be solved relatively easily, with some constraint.
Further, it can be drink or drugs that caused this ‘Intoxication’, or
it can be unrestrained happiness and enthusiasm. Moderate any
or all of these factors and you will gain a clearer vision and have a
deeper focus on your situation. Either way, try not to worry about
how much is actually being achieved. Right now, find enjoyment
in this ‘Intoxication’, but remember to come back to earth when
the feelings diminish.
Keywords: False courage. Inexperience. Trying to do something
beyond the bounds of experience or possibility. Getting “out of
it” in order to escape something. Getting all het-up over tiny or
illusive prospects. Alcohol and drugs and the allure of escapism.
Drinking binges. Ecstasy. Hangovers. Attempting to do the
impossible.
TheCaution: Giddiness, lightheadedness, unwanted side effects.
Getting nowhere. Inability to ground things in reality. Making a
fool of one’s self. Intoxication that inhibits seeing what's really
possible. Alcoholism and drug habits. Losing reality. Mindlessness
that confuses or misleads. Going too far too fast. Forgetting who
or where you are.
Leo 21
The very best addictive drugs
are produced by our bodies
when we’re in romantic/erotic
love.
Barbara Sher
I like liquor—its taste and its
effects—and that is just the
reason why I never drink it.
Stonewall Jackson
Life itself is the proper binge.
Julia Child
We never really know what
stupidity is until we have
experimented on ourselves.
Paul Gauguin
When a man is intoxicated by
alcohol,he can recover,but
when intoxicated by power,he
seldom recovers.
James F.Byrnes
Look,I really don’t want to wax
philosophic,but I will say that if
you’re alive,you got to flap your
arms and legs,you got to jump
around a lot,you got to make
a lot of noise… or at least your
thoughts should be noisy and
colorful and lively.
Mel Brooks
The aim of life is to live,and
to live means to be aware,
joyously,drunkenly,serenely,
divinely aware.
Henry Miller

<<<PAGE 165>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
142
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CARRIER PIGEON FULFILLING ITS
MISSION
Commentary: ‘A Carrier Pigeon Fulfilling its Mission’ shows the
completion of a task, delivering a message or completing a voyage
or ‘Mission’. There is a clear sense of purpose and direction,
even a sense of some divine guidance. ‘Carrier Pigeons’ have
a magnetic compass that allows them to know where they are
and where they are going. They can pinpoint their destination
exactly. Knowing and finding the route to their destination is a
natural part of the 'Pigeon’s' life.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that you may have to let your
natural relationship with the environment guide you intuitively
and instinctively. We are most naturally inclined to follow a
meaningful path if we just allow ourselves to respond to our inner
guidance. It often feels strange to release control or inhibitions
and to just “go with the flow”, but this is not a meaningless and
directionless destination. As this ‘Pigeon’ is ‘Fulfilling its Mission’
you know that the end is in sight, and there is a prize to be won
for bringing a message to those who need it. The reward can be
financial, emotional, or otherwise somehow personally gratifying.
The ‘Carrier Pigeon’ needs to deliver a message or bridge distances
between people. However, this ‘Mission’ may not necessarily be
positive or personally rewarding. The message being conveyed
may be harmful or malicious gossip or merely useless information.
In that case, the outcome may be less than desirable. This Symbol
shows the importance of messages getting through to those who
need to hear them. A special job that one must fulfill can lead to
having a sense of duty or place. Whatever the ‘Mission’ is, this
Symbol indicates that done well, with love and awareness, it will
be ‘Fulfilled’ and carried out successfully.
Keywords: Bringer of good tidings and news. Creating lines
of communication. Completing tasks. Feeling like one is on
a mission. Finding out what’s truly going on. Having a sense
of destiny. Receiving orders from a higher authority. Being
magnetically aligned. Pigeons, doves. Not being put off the track
no matter what. Mail. Flying home.
The Caution: Gossip. Messages that are not useful to anyone
or are outworn and old. Needing recognition and applause for
doing simple things. Useless information. Putting a lot of effort
into something that is not worth it. “Stool pigeons”. Working
until one drops from exhaustion. Being so one-pointed that you
forget other parts of your life.
Leo 22
Here is the test to find whether
your mission on earth is finished.
If you’re alive,it isn’t.
Richard Bach
Houston,Tranquillity Base here.
The Eagle has landed.
Neil Armstrong
That’s one small step for man,
one giant leap for mankind.
Neil Armstrong
I got the message.All of us get
the message,sooner or later.If
you get it before it’s too late or
before you’re too old,you’ll pull
through all right.
Nat King Cole
Whenever you have truth it
must be given with love,or the
message and the messenger will
be rejected.
Mahatma Gandhi
When you discover your mission,
you will feel its demand.It will
fill you with enthusiasm and a
burning desire to get to work
on it.
W.Clement Stone
If there were any justice in this
world,peoplewouldoccasionally
be permitted to fly over pigeons.
Gene Brown
Don't shoot the messenger.
Old Saying

<<<PAGE 166>>>
LEO
U
143
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BAREBACK RIDER IN A CIRCUS
DISPLAYS HER DANGEROUS SKILL
Commentary: ‘A Bareback Rider in a Circus Displays Her
Dangerous Skill’. She puts herself in the middle of the action,
taking risks that are second nature to her. Training has prepared
her to perform tricks and maneuvers that seem awe-inspiring,
well timed and carefully planned. She is so well rehearsed that
even the most dangerous stunts are done with ease. These things,
however, can be so daring or dangerous that others would have
trouble even imagining doing them, let alone actually attempting
to do them. She has an amazing sense of balance and belief in
her center of gravity.
Oracle: You may believe passionately in what you are doing,
but in order to prove yourself to others you need to present
your abilities and feelings boldly and skillfully. You may need to
be fully prepared to rush into the “ring” and show what you’re
capable of. This done correctly will impress others, and may
cause others to be in awe of your talent and the risks and dangers
involved. However, remember to be wary of “running into the
ring” unrehearsed, unprepared or in the wrong frame of mind. A
sense of timing and the knowledge of what you’re doing is critical,
as is being unruffled that others may be watching to see how well
you succeed. If you have confidence in your abilities, there’s a
good chance that you won’t be “bucked” or “thrown off”. You
will have the ability to complete your mission and be applauded
by others for your achievement. If, however, you are scared stiff
of taking on this challenge, do you think you should chance it?
If you are merely looking for applause, acclaim or recognition
from others, without being sure of what you’re doing, this may
indeed be a dangerous and foolhardy stunt. Do you feel you have
the balance, skills and courage to do what is necessary?
Keywords: Defying gravity. Controlling one’s animal instincts.
Courage and mastery over one’s energies. Shows of strength.
Situations where one might get “bucked”. Rushing in where angels
fear to tread. Being shown in the media. The allure of drama and
danger. Life as a circus or carnival. Amazing displays of skill.
Superheroes. Comic book characters. Impressing people with
well-rehearsed skills.
TheCaution: “Showing off”, losing control and falling. Demanding
attention. Looking for applause. Fooling with nature’s energies.
Arousing or controlling animal passions. Acting wildly and not
thinking about the consequences.
Leo 23
He who rides a tiger is afraid to
dismount.
Chinese Proverb
Being on the tightrope is living;
everything else is waiting.
KarlWallenda
I sit astride life like a bad rider
on a horse.I only owe it to the
horse’s good nature that I am
not thrown off at this very
moment.
LudwigWittgenstein
CIRCUS,n.A place where horses,
ponies and elephants are
permitted to see men,women
and children acting the fool.
Ambrose Bierce
I get enough exercise just
pushing my luck.
Bumper Sticker
If you can’t ride two horses at
once,you shouldn’t be in the
circus.
G.McAllister
Better ride on an ass that carries
me than a horse that throws
me.
Romanian Proverb
Will is to grace as the horse is to
the rider.
Saint Augustine
Noone reaches a high position
without daring.
Publilius Syrus

<<<PAGE 167>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
144
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TOTALLY CONCENTRATED UPON
INNER SPIRITUAL ATTAINMENT,
A MAN IS SITTING IN A STATE OF
NEGLECT OF HIS BODY
Commentary: ‘Totally Concentrated Upon Inner Spiritual
Attainment, a Man is Sitting in a State of Neglect of His Body’. This
brings to mind the Hindu yogi. The yogi can be so focused on his
inner state of being that he doesn’t notice his more earthly physical
needs. He may be able to sit in one position for a very long time, or
to use his body in ways that would make others uncomfortable. He
may not eat or drink for days. The ‘Body’ may, or may not, actually
be ‘Neglected’, but there may be a desire to put the body’s needs
on hold while he concentrates on more important or immediate
spiritual or mental needs and values.
Oracle: There can be a feeling of imbalance at the moment. Some
aspects of your life may be put on hold in favor of one central issue
that has taken over. This can lead to a loss of holistic balance and,
possibly, being misunderstood by others. Being so committed to
spiritual or emotional concerns can lead to losing touch with more
immediate, physical matters, but it can lead to a higher state of
spiritual being. Although spiritual concerns are very important
during our lifetime, remember that we also have a physical life to
lead. This Symbol can show the opposite polarity: Obsession with
the body and physical fitness. As human beings, however, we are
not supposed to concentrate solely on one or the other. We must
strive to live equally in both. Our ‘Bodies’, minds, hearts and spirits
are gifts to us, and should be treated with care. When this Symbol
is around, it can also indicate people getting a high from not eating,
through fasting, etc. It can lead to many physical problems such as
eating disorders, etc. However, physical fitness can be achieved by
directing the body to do things using willpower and focus. A sense
of equilibrium is the key.
Keywords: Issues of how we view and value our bodies. Fixation on
exercise and nutrition at the expense of more spiritual or emotional
issues. Eating disorders. Gymnasiums and physical fitness issues.
Spiritual gurus. Yoga and yogis. Living for the future. Extreme states
of meditation. Total concentration. Breatharians.
TheCaution: Not enough attention to the body or physical needs. A
lackoffocusonmoreimmediateissuessuchasfoodandexerciseOR
forgetting spiritual, emotional or mental concerns through a focus
on the body or physical aspects. Too many things on one’s mind.
Obsessions leading to imbalance. Not eating or drinking.
Leo 24
The man whose whole activity
is diverted to inner meditation
becomes insensible to all his
surroundings.His passions are
mere appearances,being sterile.
They are dissipated in futile
imaginings,producing nothing
external to themselves.
Emile Durkheim
Self-loving is not so vile a sin,
my liege,as self-neglecting.
William Shakespeare
I’ve never met a healthy person
who worried much about his
health or a good person who
worried much about his soul.
John B.S.Haldane
Meditation has been defined as
“the cessation of active eternal
thought.”
H.P.Blavatsky
If a man watches three football
games in a row,he should be
declared legally dead.
Erma Bombeck
Be careless in your dress if you
must,but keep a tidy soul.
MarkTwain
In our era,the road to holiness
necessarily passes through the
world of action.
Dag Hammarskjold
He who conceals his disease
cannot expect to be cured.
Proverb

<<<PAGE 168>>>
LEO
U
145
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGE CAMEL CROSSING A VAST
AND FORBIDDING DESERT
Commentary: ‘A Large Camel Crossing a Vast and Forbidding
Desert’ is an image of endurance, strength and determination.
The ‘Camel’ has the ability to overcome challenges and obstacles
to complete a ‘Vast and Forbidding’ journey. The ‘Large Camel’
doesn’t realize how amazing and noteworthy this feat of
endurance is; he’s merely getting on with what he must do. It’s
part of his nature. Human beings, on the other hand, find going
so far on so little reserves in such 'Forbidding' conditions very
challenging. Further, the ‘Camel’ may also have a rider or a heavy
load to carry. It can feel like something almost impossible or too
much to ask of somebody.
Oracle: Your situation may already feel like an arduous journey,
but there is still probably further to go. Be confident that you have
the reserves to survive and the endurance to succeed. It may be
that the source of this energy or confidence is stored in someone
else. Expecting someone to be there to provide sustenance and
revitalization can be a lot to ask of them. It can be a great sacrifice
or burden, and it is often a family member or very close friend
that will fulfill this duty. The important thing to remember is
that this is a long and difficult journey, but whoever is doing it is
purpose built for it and capable of achieving it. Issues to do with
self-sufficiency may arise. Mental and emotional self-control are
very necessary. Another perspective could show someone who’s
totally comfortable doing the “hard yards”. It may look daunting
and impossible to others, but to them it is familiar and perhaps
even comforting. As the ‘Camel’ is prepared for long stretches
in the ‘Desert’, so too are you for the task before you. Make sure
you have what you need with you.
Keywords: Completing a journey. Protecting oneself from
spiritual “sunstroke”. Tests of karma. Taking on daunting tasks.
Taking one step at a time. Feeling totally at home. Provisions
that nurture and satisfy. Camels, caravans, oasis, mirages, water,
deserts. Stamina and fortitude. Crossing to the other side.
Endurance. Thirst. Survival against the odds. Transport. Bad
backs. Back packs. Cargo. Saddling up.
TheCaution: Not preparing properly and running out of reserves.
Feeling weighed down and in danger of not making it through.
Not seeing the big picture. Lack of sustenance. Big plans with no
back up. Taking on huge tasks when one shouldn’t. Being daunted
by huge projects. Mirages that confuse objectives.
Leo 25
What makes the desert
beautiful is that somewhere it
hides a well.
Antoine de Saint Exupery
Only those who risk going too
far can possibly find out how
far one can go.
T.S.Eliot
The Promised Land always
lies on the other side of a
wilderness.
Havelock Ellis
The man who goes alone can
start today;but he who travels
with another must wait till that
other is ready.
Henry DavidThoreau
If you’re going through hell,
keep going.
Winston Churchill
My ancestors wandered lost in
the wilderness for forty years
because even in biblical times,
men would not stop to ask for
directions.
Elayne Boosler
Trust in God – but tie your
camel tight.
Persian Proverb
Much has been written about
the beauty,the stillness,the
terror of the desert but little
about its flies.
Belle Livingstone

<<<PAGE 169>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
146
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AFTER A HEAVY STORM,A RAINBOW
APPEARS
Commentary: ‘After a Heavy Storm, a Rainbow’ shows the
promise of relief, sunshine and beauty after a difficult passage.
The ‘Rainbow’ is a reminder of God’s covenant that was made
with every living creature of the earth; the promise that He
would never flood the world again. The ‘Storm’ may have been
difficult to endure with deluges, threatening claps of thunder and
lightning, and difficult, torrid times. There can be great shocks,
but as there is the promise of the ‘Rainbow’, you can be certain
that the end result will be okay.
Oracle: Although great obstacles to recovery often arise, for the
moment you need to be reassured by signs of better times coming.
This can be difficult to believe at first, it can be hard to trust that
the ‘Storm’ is not going to swing back round again. Take a look
around, when you can, and assess what actual damage has been
done by the ‘Storm’. The ‘Heavy Storm’ can inflict such damage
and violence that it is hard to imagine things the way they were
before it hit. There’s a need to focus on hope to help you out of
this dilemma, although it can be a struggle to persevere in these
situations, and the possibility of a ‘Rainbow’ at the end can seem
almost laughable. However, keep in mind that although everyone
has to go through the ‘Storms’ and darkness that life throws at
us they are rarely permanent. After the difficulties have passed,
the calm that follows has a beautiful and “relieved” quality to it.
Also, we are far more inclined to appreciate the happy times after
we’ve been through the tempest. It may be time to “smell the
roses”. Try wearing colorful clothes, opening the windows and
getting out into the fresh air. Appreciate the good things that are
available right now. Remember; without the ‘Storm’ there would
be no possibility of the blessing of the ‘Rainbow’.
Keywords: Release from stressful situations. The light of spirit
returning to infuse with energy. Euphoria. Rushes of endorphins.
Relief. The sun coming out whilst dark clouds are still in the
air. The joy of survival. Rainbows and light. Piercing through
darkness. Reminders of the good things in life. Peace restored.
TheCaution: Having selfish thoughts about the rewards inherent
in every external sign or “pot of gold”. Seeking storms or
arguments and trouble to stir things up. Enjoyment and promotion
of conflict. Violence and destruction. Carnage. Not seeing the
beauty around. Blocked drains and emotions.
Leo 26
Birds sing after a storm;why
shouldn’t people feel as free to
delight in whatever remains to
them?
Rose Kennedy
Be thou the rainbow to the
storms of life,the evening
beam that smiles the clouds
away,and tints tomorrow with
prophetic ray!
Lord Byron
We live in a rainbow of chaos.
Paul Cezanne
And when it rains on your
parade,look up rather than
down.Without the rain,there
would be no rainbow.
Jerry Chin
Walk on a rainbow trail;walk
on a trail of song,and all about
you will be beauty.There is a
way out of every dark mist,over
a rainbow trail.
Edward A.Navajo
The way I see it,if you want the
rainbow,you gotta put up with
the rain.
Dolly Parton
The rainbow would be even
more beautiful if the show was
not for free.
Antilles Proverb
The soul would have no
rainbow had the eyes no tears.
JohnVance Cheney

<<<PAGE 170>>>
LEO
U
147
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DAYBREAK—THE LUMINESCENCE
OF DAWN IN THE EASTERN SKY
Commentary: ‘Daybreak—the Luminescence of Dawn in
the Eastern Sky’ is a wonderful image of renewal, hope and
possibility for the future. This Symbol beautifully illustrates the
emergence of light from night to day—there is a ‘Luminescence
in the Eastern Sky’. It is the time when night and day both seem
to exist at the same time. There is a little of both as the ‘stars’
are still visible whilst the light of the sun slowly intensifies and
claims the earth.
Oracle: This is a time for making plans, resolutions or meditating
on any new tasks that are ahead. It seems there is finally a chance
for a new beginning—to start over. Imagination can be strong
with expectations and enthusiasm running high. These things
can put us in the perfect frame of mind and give us the energy
for the ‘Day’ ahead. In regards to your situation, things have been
sacrificed and there may be a certain emptiness. Regardless, you
must see the light and move forward again. It is now time to
stop operating in the dark. New ideas, new opportunities, new
perspectives, new realizations are emerging. Don’t dwell on what
has passed away or what is yet to be. In order to fully realize the
potential of this Symbol, try performing some morning rituals.
Things like meditation, yoga, tai chi or going for a walk can
prepare one’s mind and body for the day ahead. These can really
awaken both body and spirit. How do you feel when you wake
up? This may help you to understand what’s lying before you.
Recognize the coming of this ‘Daybreak’, this new day, and listen
to the birds, watch the beauty of the morning sky and soak up
the environment at ‘Dawn’. Something is likely to have changed,
even if it is just your perspective.
Keywords: Gradual realization of opportunities. New cycles
beginning. Feeling that one can leave the past behind, finally.
Transitions between darkness and light. Meditation and yoga.
Scenes of awe and amazement. Things slowly being revealed.
Dawning awareness. Light from the east. Awakening. Looking
to the future. Luminescent light.
The Caution: Being fearful and distrusting new experiences or
situations. Thinking that everything will be O.K. “tomorrow” (i.e.
not today). Closing things down when they should be opening
up. Feeling like one’s asleep and can’t wake up. Staying in bed
and missing out on new opportunities. Not moving on when it’s
necessary.
Leo 27
Keep your face to the sunshine
and you cannot see the
shadows.
Helen Keller
Faith is the bird that feels the
light when the dawn is still dark.
RabindranathTagore
Only that day dawns to which
we are awake.There is more
day to dawn.The sun is but a
morning star.
Henry DavidThoreau
In saffron-colored mantle,from
the tides of ocean rose the
morning to bring light to gods
and men.
Homer
More light!
Goethe—last words
One may not reach the dawn
save by the path of the night.
Kahlil Gibran
Dawn does not come twice to
awaken a man.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
If every day is an awakening,
you will never grow old.You will
just keep growing.
Gail Sheehy
The sun puts on a wonderful
show at daybreak,yet most
people in the audience go on
sleeping.
AdaTeixeria

<<<PAGE 171>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
148
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
MANY LITTLE BIRDS CHIRPING ON
THE LIMB OF A LARGE TREE
Commentary: ‘Many Little Birds Chirping on the Limb of a Large
Tree’ is an image of fluttering and chirping, movement and song.
The ‘Tree’ can seem packed with chattering and movement and
yet the ‘Birds’ can be quite invisible. ‘Birds’ gathering, to chatter
is common, particularly at the end of the day. The Symbol can
reflect things like advertising, political campaigns, egotistical
prattling and even children chatting and playing together.
Oracle: The common element in this Symbol is the attempt to
have one’s voice heard above all the noise and din of the everyday
world. It can be hard to gain the attention of others when there’s
so much competition around. This also can be true when trying
to listen to your own inner voice. It can feel like your needs, or
your voice, are just one of so many, with little prospect or ability
to have your ideas, opinions or plans heard. Perhaps you have a
viewpoint or a project such as a book that you want to get “out
there”. There may seem to be too many points of view, opinions
or options now. Although the overall situation is probably secure
and stable, there are still some confusions to be resolved. There
may be many people or personalities that one has to deal with
or look after. Further, you may be vulnerable to lots of chatter
going on in your mind. It can sometimes sound like a cacophony
of sound, where the intuitive voice or wisdom is drowned out by
noise from the emotional world inside. When this happens it is
useful to use a tool, such as the Sabian Symbols, to help you focus
on your true objective. Try to relax and gain some perspective
until things become a little more settled.
Keywords: Gathering with people of like mind. Sharing ideas.
Huge structures where people can get lost in the crowd. Big
business, government and bureaucracy. Multilevel marketing.
Databases. The Internet and chat groups. Books, tapes and cds.
Publishing houses. Competition. Telephone switchboards. Trying
to gain attention.
TheCaution:Manyvoices—someheard,somenot.Beingconfused
or immobilized by too much advice or information. Too many
sounds. Having trouble hearing the essential truth. A scattering
of energies. Not getting a word in edgeways. Everybody talking
and nobody listening. Being one of many. Noise and distraction.
Staying with the mediocre. The masses. Being invisible. Useless
chattering or noise.
Leo 28
The higher you go,the wider
the spread of the network of
communication that will make
or break you.It extends not only
to more people below,but to
new levels above.And it extends
all around,to endless other
departments and interests
interacting with yours.
DonaldWalton
After all is said and done,more
is said than done.
American Proverb
All of our operators are busy.
Your call is important to us and
will be answered by the first
available operator.
The constant recurring
message of business
The eagle suffers little birds to
sing and is not careful what
they mean thereby.
William Shakespeare
Gossip is nature’s telephone.
Sholom Aleichem
I’ve suffered from all of the
hang-ups knownand none is as
bad as the telephone.
Richard Armour
If the first person who answers
the phone cannot answer your
question it’s a bureaucracy.If
the first person can answer your
question,it’s a miracle.
Gerald F.Lieberman

<<<PAGE 172>>>
LEO
U
149
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MERMAID HAS CLIMBED TO THE
ROCKY SHORE OF A BLEAK COAST;
SHE AWAITS THE PRINCE WHO WILL
BRING HER IMMORTALITY
Commentary: The ‘Mermaid Has Climbed to the Rocky Shore
of a Bleak Coast’, shows a woman who has previously merely
existed in the waters of life and is now ready to emerge into a
more conscious existence as an individual in her own right. She
is willing to ‘Climb the Rocky Shore’ no matter how ‘Bleak’ the
'Coast' may be. She may have to leave her home and past behind
in order to move into a new life, a new relationship or new
beginning of some kind. She will learn to better communicate
her emotions, thoughts and ideas. In being able to more fully
verbalize and express herself and to “walk her talk”, she can
find her place and sense of purpose: the 'Immortality' that can
be achieved in this new reality.
Oracle: You must have belief in your ability to cope as an
individual emerging into new arenas. ‘The Prince Who Will
Bring Her Immortality’, can show the seeking of perfection in
one’s self through relationships. Be careful not to project too
much authority onto your partner. This can lead to feelings of
insecurity and being out of one’s depth. You may be expecting
others to acknowledge your existence, possibly feeling invisible
until they do. However, other people, and probably someone in
particular, may bring you insights into your capabilities, talents
and attributes so that you can become more of what you’re meant
to become. The female/mermaid, male/prince doesn’t necessarily
always translate into these gender definitions. The ‘Mermaid’
may indeed be male, waiting for his “princess” to come to make
his life complete. Whichever, how will the partner cope when
the ‘Mermaid’ truly gains her own feet and voice? With this new
sense of belonging, ideas can be brought into reality in a new
world of experience.
Keywords: Coming into conscious form. New ways of being.
Transformation. New forms emerging out of the past. Needing,
and probably expecting, recognition. Feeling different from the
crowd. Learning to stand on your own two feet. Problems with
feet and legs. Longing to make an impression.
The Caution: Focusing on social or rational aspects before
being ready. Naivety. Being thrown in the deep end. Relying on
relationships too much. Looking to the other for validation of
one’s existence. Co-dependent behavior.
Leo 29
I feel my immortality over
sweep all pains,all tears,all
time,all fears,—and peal,like
the eternal thunders of the
deep,into my ears,this truth;
thou livest forever!
Byron
Hope is the expectation that
something outside of ourselves,
something or someone
external,is going to come to our
rescue and we will live happily
ever after.
Dr.Robert Anthony
Higher than the question of
our duration is the question of
our deserving.Immortality will
come to such as are fit for it,
and he would be a great soul in
future must be a great soul now.
RalphWaldo Emerson
I argue thee that love is life and
life hath immortality.
Emily Dickinson
I don’t want to achieve
immortality through my
work… I want to achieve it
through not dying.
Woody Allen
If a man carefully examines his
thoughts he will be surprised
to find how much he lives in
the future.His well being is
always ahead.Such a creature
is probably immortal.
RalphWaldo Emerson

<<<PAGE 173>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
U
150
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN UNSEALED LETTER HAS VITAL
AND CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Commentary: ‘An Unsealed Letter’ is an image of words or
thoughts, letters, notes or messages. They have been written,
but as the ‘Letter’ is ‘Unsealed’, they have not been ‘Sealed’ in
an envelope. ‘Vital and Confidential Information’ implies that
important messages and information may need to be concealed
from others. Being ‘Unsealed’ shows that it is possible that others
would want to peek at (or be shown) what’s been said or written.
There could be important papers lying around, or perhaps they
are lost amongst other papers and proving difficult to find. It
is possible that this ‘Information’ could be seen by the wrong
eyes.
Oracle: Getting your thoughts down on paper can lead to greater
understandings about people and situations. If there is a message
that you wish to spread, you will be able to do it as long as you
make the effort to put it into reality. When this is done out in the
open anyone can, and will, benefit from it. Communicating in a
trusting, carefree way leads to doubts being dispelled. However,
are your ideas, thoughts and emotions feeling exposed because
you have been too trusting and “worn your heart on your sleeve”?
Pausing to reflect can be advantageous. Sometimes we have very
strong feelings about a person or a situation, but caution is called
for as these can change with time. You may regret someone having
seen or learnt what’s been on your mind. The ‘Information’ in
the ‘Unsealed Letter’ can be messages, thoughts or ideas that
have been thought through and are now being translated to
the written word. This also shows writing books, articles, e-
mails along with verbal messages of all kinds. The ‘Vital and
Confidential Information’ is obviously something important.
Should it be shared with all or only a few? Remember to employ
integrity in all that is said and thought.
Keywords: Wearing your heart on your sleeve. Shared thoughts
and feelings. Declaring what needs to be said. “Dear John” letters.
Laying one’s self on the line through writing things down. Diaries.
Letters. Penmanship. Messages of intent. Things said out loud.
Confidences.
The Caution: Playing games with information. Pretending to
conceal for the purposes of deceit. Blurting things out. Not giving
any indication of what’s thought. Being upset about having things
out in the open. Passing on the secrets of others. Revealing things
that shouldn’t be revealed.
Leo 30
Please excuse the length of this
letter;I do not have time to be
brief.
Anon
Better than a thousand useless
words is one single word that
gives peace.Better than a
thousand useless verses is one
single verse that gives peace.
Better than a hundred useless
poems is one single poem that
gives peace.
The Dhammapada
Afraid lest he be caught up
in a net of words,tripped up,
bewildered and so defeated—
thrown aside—a man hesitates
to write down his innermost
convictions.
William CarlosWilliams
It is wise to disclose what
cannot be concealed.
Johann FriedrichVon Schiller
A writer is dear and necessary
for us only in the measure of
which he reveals to us the inner
workings of his very soul.
Count LeoTolstoy
Never write a letter while you
are angry.
Chinese Proverb
A secret is like a dove:when it
leaves my hand it takes wing.
Arabian Proverb

<<<PAGE 174>>>
VIRGO
I
151
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN A PORTRAIT,THE BEST OF A
MAN’S TRAITS AND CHARACTER
ARE IDEALIZED
Commentary: ‘In a Portrait, the Best of a Man’s Traits and Character
are Idealized’ is an image of a person shown, or portrayed, in a
painting, drawing, story or photograph; with the good features
highlighted and the negative factors left out. This may be a positive
thing, or it may miss the true characteristics of the person. Our face
is nature’s “name-tag”; it tells something about our personality, our
temperament and race. Having features that make one stand out in
the crowd can be a good or a negative thing, depending on one’s
situation, viewpoint or beliefs.
Oracle: You may need to remind yourself of the true features of the
situationbeforeyou.Isthe“truepicture”—the‘Man’sTraits’—allowing
their true beauty to be seen? If so, someone is presenting him or
herselfwithintegrityanddistinction.However,wesometimesanalyze
others based on a superficial or ‘Idealized’ image we have of them.
This can distort the truth. When we do this, we are often really just
projecting our own thoughts, or desires, on to them. If someone is
“goodlooking”,doweappraisethemdifferentlyfromotherswhomwe
thinkarenot?Ifpeoplehavefacialdisfigurations,doweconsiderthat
they are somehow “lesser”? Be wary of “judging a book by its cover”.
However, it may be necessary to look for the best in a situation or
person,andavoidthemoreundesirablefactors.Whatlieswithinmay
bedifferentfromwhat’sapparentonthesurface.Studyingsomeone’s
face, or how they look, for visual clues to who they are can lead to
accurate conclusions, if you know how to look for the “right” things.
Sometimes we make up stories or have fantasies about people so that
we can justify thinking better or worse of them. What is the picture
of the situation facing you? Do you feel it is an honest representation
of what’s going on, or is something being covered-up?
Keywords: Projection of beauty. Drawings, paintings, photographs,
etc. Art, cosmetics, beauty salons. Hairstyles. Elevated thoughts or
memories. Taking someone at face value. Visual senses and clues.
Recognition. Caricatures of people. Highlighting features. “Identikit”
drawings. Visual prototypes. Profiles. Face reading. Written reviews
and references. Viewpoints.
TheCaution:Nottrulyassessingpeople.Vanity.Superficialjudgments.
Propaganda. Misleading appearances. Tagging people with labels.
Misidentifications. Taking someone the wrong way. Seeing only the
best, or the worst. Preconceived beliefs. Feeling misunderstood.
Prejudice. Projections.
Virgo 1
Every artist dips his brush in his
own soul,and paints his own
nature into his pictures.
HenryWard Beecher
A man finds room in the few
square inches of the face for the
traits of all his ancestors,for the
expression of all his history,and
his wants.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Did you ever see a portrait of a
great man without perceiving
strong traits of pain and
anxiety?
John Adams
A man must be strong enough
to mold the peculiarity of
his imperfections into the
perfection of his peculiarities.
Walter Rathenau
Throughout the centuries,
man has considered himself
beautiful.I rather suppose that
man only believes in his own
beauty out of pride;that he
is not really beautiful and he
suspects this himself;for why
does he look on the face of his
fellowman with such scorn?
Isidore Ducasse Lautreamont
The true ideal is not opposed
to the real but lies in it;and
blessed are the eyes that find if.
James Russell Lowell

<<<PAGE 175>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
152
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGEWHITE CROSS,DOMINATING
THE LANDSCAPE,STANDS ALONE ON
TOP OF A HIGH HILL
Commentary: ‘A Large White Cross, Dominating the Landscape,
Stands Alone on Top of a High Hill’ is a symbol of suffering and
loss and the hope of faith and salvation. Symbols such as the
‘Cross’ have long had a deep, meaningful and powerful influence.
That the ‘Cross’ is ‘Standing Alone’ depicts a sense of desertion,
perhaps of one’s faith or life circumstances. This can bring a sense
of isolation. The idea, or belief, that suffering and giving up one’s
personal desires as a means to salvation has special significance
for many people, but what does it really mean? True religion is
supposed to unite people in many ways. Dogmatic expressions of
faith can either unite or divide, even in what should be seen as a
common cause. People need symbols of faith to rally around and
inspire them.
Oracle: Feelings of loneliness or loss can be healed with signs of
hope and faith for a brighter future. A religious experience can
change one's life and lead to spiritual fulfillment and the highest
sense of joy. However, these experiences can also lead to throwing
one's life away. There can be too much emphasis on spiritual and
“other worldly” values, which can lead people to lose their day-to-
day lives. Some may feel that they are being treated like a scapegoat,
“hung out to dry”; punished for doing something or being different
or special in some way. Instead of having a “cross to bear”, we can
work at realigning ourselves with our true desires and allegiances.
We can ground our selves and our lives by creating a balanced set
of circumstances in our life: money, relationships, family, career,
etc. This can lead to a stronger sense of purpose and spirituality,
dissipating feelings of sacrifice, separation or loneliness.
Keywords: Religious ideals dominating. The fear or the wonder
of God. Following a mystic path. The need to find a savior. Being
alone and forgotten. Monuments to pain and suffering. Tributes to
or memories of those lost or gone before. Reminders of salvation.
Images of redemption. The Church. Christianity and other religions.
Martyrdom. The Inquisition.
The Caution: Aloneness and/or sacrifice or the yearning for it.
Dogmatism. Scapegoating. Days in the wilderness alone. Religion
dictating against one’s desires or needs. Symbols that inspire
guilt and anguish instead of love, acceptance and forgiveness.
Institutions disregarding individual rights. Lording it over others.
Bullying under the guise of religion. Imposing figures.
Virgo 2
The anguish of the neurotic
individual is the same as that of
the saint.The neurotic and the
saint are engaged in the same
battle.Their blood flows from
similar wounds.But the first one
gasps and the other one gives.
Georges Bataille
The heresies we should fear are
those which can be confused
with orthodoxy.
Jorge Luis Borges
Victims suggest innocence.And
innocence,by the inexorable
logic that governs all relational
terms,suggests guilt.
Susan Sontag
Martyrdom has always been
a proof of the intensity,never
of the correctness of a belief.
Arthur Schnitzler
If you bear the cross willingly,it
will bear you.
Thomas A.Kempis
Forgive me my nonsense as I
forgive the nonsense of those
who think they talk sense.
Anon
Christ was crucified for saying
“the Kingdom is within you.”
Joseph Campbell
Greater love hath no man than
this,that a man lay down his
life for his friends.
Jesus Christ

<<<PAGE 176>>>
VIRGO
I
153
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO GUARDIAN ANGELS BRINGING
PROTECTION
Commentary: ‘Two Guardian Angels Bringing Protection’ is a
beautiful Symbol that brings to mind images of salvation, release
and protection. Being there for us, ‘Guardian Angels’ are believed
to look out for our best interests, especially when we most need
them. This is particularly true when we feel we are about to
stumble or fall in some way. Our ‘Guardian Angels’ are with us
even if we don’t have a conscious awareness of their existence
or presence, although if we do consciously evoke them, they are
likely to be more “present” or obvious to us, in whatever form.
Oracle: This Symbol reminds us that no matter what we do,
where we are, how difficult our struggles or how successful
our activities, our ‘Angels’ are always with us. ‘Guardian Angels’
appear in many forms – as strangers, friends, family members,
even as events, etc. They can come to us in moments of deep
despair, when all seems lost and we feel abandoned and alone.
Their messages and actions can signal a turning point, a feeling
that life is well worth the struggles and torments we have to
sometimes endure. With this Symbol, there is reassurance that
you are not alone, lost or forgotten in a situation, at least not for
very long. There is a strong sense that protection, guidance and
direction are around. Hold a feeling close to your mind and heart;
the belief that invisible, or visible, help is coming. This will ensure
that help and relief will, indeed, become available. Remember
that friends and family can often help, especially in the role of
acting as sounding boards or counselors. Once things are back
on track, it is likely you will find the true path that you must
follow. Feeling good about your direction and being protected
builds a sense of inner strength. You are never alone when you
draw this Symbol. Open up to the ‘Protection’ being offered to
you, don’t resist it.
Keywords: Connection with a sense of inner guidance. Visible
or invisible protection. People appearing when they’re needed.
Being saved in the nick of time. Creative solutions to problems
that seemed hopeless and lost. Counseling and guidance. Angels.
Security systems. Salvation. Social workers.
The Caution: Feeling lost and alone without help. Losing faith in
the goodness of life. Expecting that fate, or others, will pick up
the pieces without putting in any effort. Resisting help in order to
hang onto your “wounds”. Too much reliance on outside forces.
Not acting to change things. Victim status.
Virgo 3
Angels around us,angels beside
us,angels within us.Angels
are watching over you when
times are good or stressed.Their
wings wrap gently around you,
whispering you are loved and
blessed.
Angel Blessing
There are only two ways to
live your life.One is as though
nothing is a miracle.The other
is as though everything is a
miracle.
Albert Einstein
I’m aware that people I have
loved and have died and are in
the spirit world look after me.
Princess ofWales Diana
Make friends with the angels,
who though invisible are
always with you… Often invoke
them,constantly praise them,
and make good use of their
help and assistance in all your
temporal and spiritual affairs.
Saint Francis de Sales
We forget to pray for the Angels
and the Angels forget to pray
for us.
Leonard Cohen
We are like children,who stand
in need of masters to enlighten
us and direct us;and God has
provided for this,by appointing
his angels to be our teachers
and guides.
SaintThomas Aquinas

<<<PAGE 177>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
154
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
BLACK AND WHITE CHILDREN
PLAYING HAPPILY TOGETHER
Commentary: ‘Black and White Children Playing Happily Together’
is a Symbol of racial and social integration that brings enrichment
and joy to all who participate. That they are said to be ‘Black and
White’can,ofcourse,implythatthereareracialdifferencesbetween
them. However, it can also symbolize many other differences in
background, religion, belief systems, social or economic and
professional levels. Essentially, it can represent anything based
on social perceptions or prejudices that can keep people apart
from each other. As these ‘Children’ are said to be ‘Playing Happily
Together’, any feelings of prejudice are dispelled because of their
overriding concerns of ‘Play’ and the enjoyment of each other. The
‘Children’ share an element of innocence, fun, and creativity. Their
only desire, here, is to be ‘Playing’ with others. When these attitudes
are adopted, it is easy to see that skin color or any other differences
fade into insignificance.
Oracle:Thesituationfacingyoumayhavealotofseeminglyopposite
elements, but this is probably only an illusion of social perception.
In reality, it is the blending of people and their individual traits
and talents that allows things to be resolved and to move forward.
Accepting everyone as equal will dispel thoughts and attitudes that
can bring about separation and suspicion. There may be a need to
rememberto‘PlayHappilyTogether’,asthismayhavebeenforgotten
recently. People who have been estranged from each other can drop
their differences and come together in a fresh new light. However,
if you’re forced to be with people whose company you don’t enjoy,
this can lead to suppression of your own wants and desires. Finding
joy in the pleasure of simply being with others or seeking out
those who want to share your time can rejuvenate life and inspire
creativity. When drawing this Symbol it is important to consider
where happiness and equality lies in your list of priorities.
Keywords: Universal brotherhood. Overcoming prejudices and
boundaries that separate people. Knocking down social barriers
to relate freely. Being able to let go, relax and have fun with people
from anywhere. Adopted siblings. Foster homes. Affirmative action.
Trust and joy. Play that unites people.
TheCaution:Moralitythatisswayedbypublicopinion.Notadjusting
psychologically to situations that require creative responses. Racial
and social prejudice. Seeing things in black and white terms. Social
demarcations that separate people or situations. Apartheid. Illusions
based on the separative perceptions of society.
Virgo 4
...what I am is a humanist
before anything—before I’m a
Jew,before I’m black,before I’m
a woman.And my beliefs are
for the human race—they don’t
exclude anyone.
Whoopi Goldberg
I destroy my enemy when I make
him my friend.
Abraham Lincoln
It’s never to late to give up your
prejudices.
Henry DavidThoreau
Prejudiceisthechildofignorance.
William Hazlitt
Why must it be just a case of
black or white?There must be
more to life than this.
Freddie Mercury
The imposition of stigma is the
commonest form of violence
used in democratic societies.
R.A.Pinker
You cannot contribute anything
to the ideal condition of
mind and heart known as
Brotherhood,however much you
preach,posture,or agree,unless
you live it.
Faith Baldwin
The only moral lesson which
is suited for a child,the most
important lesson for every
time of life,is this:“Never hurt
anybody.”
Denis Breeze

<<<PAGE 178>>>
VIRGO
I
155
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN BECOMING AWARE OF
NATURE SPIRITS AND NORMALLY
UNSEEN SPIRITUAL ENERGIES
Commentary: ‘A Man Becoming Aware of Nature Spirits and
Normally Unseen Spiritual Energies’ shows the rational mind
of someone being overshadowed by supernatural and intuitive
images, thoughts and feelings. Equipped to see the invisible, this
person has started to penetrate into the deeper and more mystical
levels of the unconscious.
Oracle: There may be strong feelings of other levels of awareness
happening and these may be growing stronger by the moment.
The imagination is showing a clearer path to some understanding,
even though, along the way, there may be confusion. Look for
insights and messages in the things that you see and hear
around you. Try bringing these insights back into your everyday
consciousness, as they can expand your feelings about your self
and life. Remembering a strong sense of who you are while
allowing messages to come through from “the other side” can lead
to a heightened feeling of aliveness and an increased ‘Awareness’
of the magic and mystery of life. Getting in touch with ‘Nature
Spirits and Normally Unseen Spiritual Energies’ can be incredibly
enriching and miracles can happen in your life. Indeed, there
can be the revelation of being close to God. Your senses can
come alive on many levels, with things revealed that you may
have only imagined before. By contrast, the ordinary, everyday
world may seem boring, lifeless and shallow. You can have
surprising perceptions of existence on another level—but will
it be useful or just lead you astray? Remember to stay grounded
in your experiences as it can bring you considerable joy. Losing
touch with reality, however, can lead to losing the plot to the
point where it is difficult to discern what is real and what is
not. ‘Becoming More Aware’ of other levels of existence can be
enriching in many ways.
Keywords: Creative fantasies. Attuned minds perceiving subtle
phenomena. Fairy tales. Seeing things or imagining them.
Fantasizing. Seeing entities. Mental institutions. Halloween.
Fairies, nature spirits. Seeing the normally unseen.
TheCaution: Confusion. Lack of true perspective. Time wasted in
escapes from reality. Imagining things. Losing the plot. Dreaming
to the point of insanity. Making up things in order to be noticed
or feel somehow special. Delusions. Dreaming of possibilities
that disappear upon waking. Schizophrenia.
Virgo 5
The universe is full of magical
things patiently waiting for our
wits to grow sharper.
Eden Phillpotts
Today there are no fairy tales
for us to believe in,and this
is possibly a reason for the
universal prevalence of mental
crackup.Yes,if we were childish
in the past,I wish we could be
children once again.
Anita Loos
Don’t ask questions of fairy
tales.
Jewish Proverb
Reality is merely an illusion,
albeit a very persistent one.
Albert Einstein
There are nine orders of angels,
to wit,angels,archangels,
virtues,powers,principalities,
dominations,thrones,
cherubim,and seraphim.
Pope Gregory the Great
Reality is that which,when you
stop believing in it,doesn’t go
away.
Philip K.Dick
Every time a child says,“I don’t
believe in fairies,”there is a fairy
somewhere that falls down
dead.
James Matthew Barrie

<<<PAGE 179>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
156
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MERRY-GO-ROUND
Commentary: A ‘Merry-Go-Round’ is a Symbol that arouses
memories of fair grounds, carnivals, playgrounds and childhood
fun and games. The blaringly loud music, the children looking
around at each other and watching the faces and the squeals of
the others were all part of the fun. The thrill of going around and
around was the objective. This can be great fun for children and
big kids alike who enjoy this type of activity without tiring or
getting bored. It can, however, be another story when we’re older.
It can be tiring going around in circles without finding any real
outcome or having a clear sense of an objective to strive for.
Oracle: There’s a need to see definite possibilities and evidence of
advancement in life and to feel as though we are making progress
towards a goal or a clear outcome. This image can relate to any
situation where we feel stuck in repetitive or unprogressive ruts.
Relationships, marriages, jobs and everyday chores or habits can
have you running around in circles landing you right back in the
same place. This can lead you to wonder if you should just hold
on tight, wait to see if the thing will ever eventually stop or jump
off. Jumping off whilst things are still in motion can actually
feel life threatening. The desire, longing or even addiction to
things, people, places, substances, etc., can put a hold on your
life to the point where you can’t see a way out. Just when you
may think you’ve seen a way to get off, or out, you’re back in the
same situation, emotion or location. However, each time you
return to what feels like the same place, if you’ve been watchful,
you’ve had the opportunity to look at other alternatives, answers
or possibilities. At some stage, though, there will need to be a
decision made: do you want to keep going round and round, or do
you want to stop repetitive situations or reactions and get off?
Keywords: Repeating circles of activity. Looking for a park.
Driving around and around. Motion sickness. Childhood fun and
joy. Yo-yoing and oscillating backwards and forwards. Emotional
polarization. Once you’re on it, you want to get off. The ups
and downs and the ins and outs. Habits that are hard to break.
Carnivals. Lights. Noise. Music.
The Caution: Repeating the same mistakes. Bouncing around
from one thing to another and not getting anywhere. Feeling
like there’s no end in sight. Addictive behavior. Feeling dizzy.
Not being able to focus on one point. Manic depression. Getting
nowhere. Seeking only pleasure. Seemingly endless treadmills.
Motion sickness.
Virgo 6
The wheel goes round and
round,some are up and some
are on the down,and still the
wheel goes round.
Josephine Pollard
We dance round in a ring and
suppose,but the Secret sits in
the middle and knows.
Robert Frost
Life is a roller coaster.Try to eat
a light lunch.
David A.Schmaltz
If only bad habits could be
broken as easily as hearts!
Christopher Spranger
It’s not true that life is one
damn thing after another—it’s
the same damn thing over and
over.
Edna St.Vincent Millay
Few tasks are more like the
torture of Sisyphus than
housework,with its endless
repetition:the clean becomes
soiled;the soiled is made clean,
over and over,day after day.
Simone de Beauvoir
An umeboshi plum is a little
Japanese salt plum.The best
thing for motion sickness is to
take one of these plums ...and
tape it to your belly button.
I’m not kidding you.This really,
really works.
Marilu Henner

<<<PAGE 180>>>
VIRGO
I
157
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HAREM
Commentary: ‘A Harem’ is a Symbol of women being, living and
working together. They are often dictated to by the needs of just
one person or authority. Sometimes the women are happy with
fulfilling the needs and desires of the “master”; sometimes they’re
not. Women in a ‘Harem’ often enjoy each other’s company more
than they enjoy “the man”. Amongst the women in a ‘Harem’,
there is at least one person who acts as the “leader”, someone
that the others look up to. Even though they need to get along
and function together as a team, there are still their individual
personalities, qualities and gifts to consider.
Oracle: This Symbol can indicate too many people in a
relationship or finding happiness through women friends and
the sacrifices that may have to be accepted to achieve this. As
this is ‘A Harem’, there may be a feeling of being dominated or
being part of a group where people compete for whatever small
benefits are available. Some women want to have their women
friends all to themselves, and of course men sometimes do this
with each other, as well. In a 'Harem', sometimes the men believe
they are in charge, when in reality it is the women calling the
shots! You may find it hard to be taken seriously, to be appreciated
for your individuality or be noticed apart from the crowd. Have
faith; you can use your charm and the appealing aspects of your
nature to succeed. A greater sense of security can come when life
is protected, the finances covered, and one’s relationship needs
are satisfied. However, the desire for protection can lead to the
decision to give up other things in life. When we feel secure and
just hang out with each other, we can be more creative, carefree
and empathetic to the needs and desires of others. Remember,
we all have a unique role.
Keywords: Rising above jealousy, arrogance and passion. Waiting
to be bestowed with the gift of being “chosen”. Women’s circles,
sometimes closed. Women’s groups. Working together. Sharing
feminine rituals and stories. Egyptian tales. One person calling
the shots. Beauty salons. Seduction of the senses. Having one’s
needs serviced. Women pampering each other. People who serve.
Adoring the other. Sultans. Polygamy.
The Caution: Being just one of “the mob”. Not having a sense of
personal importance. Mistrust of other women. Seeing people as
competition. The spread of socially unacceptable diseases. Locked
doors. Sexual infidelity. Needing the love of many. Eunuchs.
Assuming the right to dominate others.
Virgo 7
A woman who is loved always
has success.
Vicki Baum
Woman must not depend upon
the protection of man,but must
be taught to protect herself.
Susan B.Anthony
The dogma of woman’s
complete historical subjection
to men must be rated as one of
the most fantastic myths ever
created by the human mind.
Mary Ritter Beard
Many abolitionists have yet to
learn the ABC of woman’s rights.
Susan B.Anthony
For what is done or learned by
one class of women becomes,
by virtue of their common
womanhood,the property of all
women.
Emily Blackwell
I can’t say that the college-bred
woman is the most contented
woman.The broader her mind
the more she understands the
unequal conditions between
men and women,the more she
chafes under a government
that tolerates it.
Susan B.Anthony
We are his,to serve him nobly in
the common cause,true to the
death,but not to be his slaves.
William Cowper

<<<PAGE 181>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
158
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GIRL TAKES HER FIRST DANCING
INSTRUCTION
Commentary: ‘A Girl Takes Her First Dancing Instruction’ is a
Symbol of youth, innocence and naïveté. The ‘Young Girl’ needs
to show respect and reverence for the “teacher”, as this person
may hold the key to her future, in some way. The ‘Girl’ must
listen to her ‘Instructor’ or teacher; otherwise she may miss the
rewards and opportunities available in the lesson she’s taking.
She also has to listen to and become one with the music. Along
with the need to accept ‘Instruction’, she must learn the steps
and the “rules”. How well she gets along with the “teacher” will
add to how well the lessons succeed.
Oracle: You may find yourself in a situation that is brand new to
you and you need to “learn the ropes”. You have the potential to
do well, but initially you may be unsure of what to do or how to
act (or react), or what “steps” to take. Even though you may know
a lot about many things, in regard to the situation facing you, you
may not have had much experience. There may be a lot to take
in, absorb and learn at the moment but one day you’ll probably
look back and see that it was actually easy, like learning to ride
a bike. After the steps to the “dance” have been learnt, you will
be able to display more maturity and grace. Eventually, people
can stop telling you how to perform. However, no matter how
much we know, we go on learning throughout our entire life.
For now you have to listen, respond and learn – that is, unless
you are the "teacher". Pay attention to what is being taught and
what, indeed, can be learnt, and you will continue to learn and
go far in life. Music and ‘Dance’ can lift your life; indeed they
can transform it.
Keywords: Practice makes perfect. Higher talents being
developed. Learning discipline, self-control and concentration.
Taking on something new. Listening to and following instructions.
Moving into a new sense of being. Losing innocence. Learning
the steps without thinking. Music and dance. Following the
rhythm. Progressing from one thing to the next. Instructors and
students.
The Caution: Difficulty understanding lessons. Continually
returning to the beginning. Not trusting the teacher or instruction.
Having to learn things against one’s desires. Believing that one
knows everything already. Fears of being seen as a beginner
or clumsy. Having two left feet. Not paying attention to life’s
lessons. Naivety.
Virgo 8
Fine dancing,I believe,like
virtue,must be its own reward.
Jane Austen
Life’s a dance,you learn as you
go,sometimes you lead and
sometimes you follow.Don’t
worry bout what you don’t
know,life’s a dance….you learn
as you go.
Katie Schrimsher
I don’t try to dance better than
anyone else.I only try to dance
better than myself.
Mikhail Baryshnikov
Remember,Ginger Rogers did
everything Fred Astaire did,but
she did it backwards and in
high heels.
FaithWhittlesey
How inimitably graceful
children are before they learn
to dance.
SamuelTaylor Coleridge
Will you,won’t youWill you,
won’t youWill you join the
dance?
Lewis Carroll
A child ...must feel the flush of
victory and the heart-sinking
of disappointment before he
takes with a will to the tasks
distasteful to him and resolves
to dance his way through a dull
routine of textbooks.
Helen Keller

<<<PAGE 182>>>
VIRGO
I
159
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EXPRESSIONIST PAINTER
MAKING A FUTURISTIC DRAWING
Commentary: ‘An Expressionist Painter’ is ‘Making a Futuristic
Drawing’. As he’s an ‘Expressionist Painter’, he’s probably an artist
ahead of his time, or at least has a different perspective to life from
most people. The ‘Painter’ may be focused and concentrating on
his task to the exclusion of all else in his life. The ‘Painter’ paints,
draws or makes plans with his thoughts, feelings and emotions; he
responds to his creations in the moment. The ‘Futuristic Drawing’
can be schemes, ‘Drawings’ or plans of things that may or may
not eventually come into reality.
Oracle: Individuality and originality seem to be the uppermost
requirements to get the most out of the situation facing you. Even
against the pressures for a more traditional or socially acceptable
response, it is your individual creativity that is needed now. Try
to look at things in a different light; picture how things will look
in the ‘Future’ if you take the steps you’re contemplating. Will
things work out as planned? What is your interpretation of the
’Future’? Who and what does it include? Many different elements
go into creating what’s possible in our lives. One thing is having
the vision – everyone has to have a vision. Another thing is having
the drive, energy and a positive affirmation to see the vision turn
into reality. The vision without the drive is useless. Maintain
both aspects and your chances of success in the ‘Future’ will
undoubtedly improve. However, always thinking that things will
be much better in the 'Future' can lead to the loss of enjoying
life in the present.
Keywords: Creativity projected into the future. Seeing things
ahead of their time. Taking chances. Having the dreamer’s disease.
Talent. Seeing things in a different way. Being unrestricted by
reality. Time machines and time travel. Artists, architects and
engineers. Plans, schemes, blueprints. "When I win the lottery..."
Forecasting and prediction. Genius. Sketches. Abstract art.
The Caution: Focusing on tomorrow not today. Not seeing
the complete picture. Plans that often come to nothing. Being
unrealistic. Losing touch with the real world. Losing enthusiasm.
Thinking the worst will happen. Making things up that don't
reflect reality. Being stuck on one version of the future. Living
for tomorrow, not today. Distorted reality. Getting lost in abstract
thought. Being divorced from the real world.
Virgo 9
I like dreams of the future better
than the history of the past.
Thomas Jefferson
We worry about what a child
will be tomorrow,yet we forget
that he is someone today.
StaciaTauscher
See things as you would have
them be instead of as they are.
Robert Collier
Great minds have purposes,
others have wishes.
Washington Irving
We are what we think.All that
we are arises with our thoughts.
With our thoughts,we make
our world.
Buddha
Know what I’m looking forward
to?The future.
Carl—The Simpsons
Every one is the architect of his
own fortune.
Mathurin Regnier
You’ll see it when you believe it.
Wayne Dyer
Well,back to the drawing
board.
Peter Arno
Life is a great big canvas,and
you should throw all the paint
on it you can.
Danny Kaye

<<<PAGE 183>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
160
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO HEADS LOOKING OUT AND
BEYOND THE SHADOWS
Commentary: ‘Two Heads Looking Out and Beyond the Shadows’
is a Symbol of duality of thought and observation. This Symbol
shows people looking at each other from a ‘Shadowy’, hidden
perspective, as though they are checking each other out. The
“Two Heads” can illustrate groups of people having different
perspectives, or occupying different camps, ‘Looking Out’ and
trying to understand, or investigate, what the “other” is doing.
Oracle: At the moment you may need to be able to see things from
more than one side. While what’s happening may not be entirely
visible or obvious, it is necessary to look beyond the ‘Shadows’
and into the light. If you feel stuck in a situation because the
details of what’s really happening are not clear, try making some
type of plan. Mapping out what alternatives there are and the
outcomes of possible scenarios will be beneficial. The right plan
of action can lead to light being shed and things being revealed.
As there are ‘Two Heads’ pictured here, two people observing
exactly the same thing can come to very different conclusions.
There may be arguments, bickering and stalemates if they find it
hard to agree with each other. Their observations can be quite
different, but this can lead to interesting and useful solutions,
especially if they take the time to listen to each other. The ‘Two
Heads’ duality can also exist in one person’s thoughts. Seeing
both sides of a situation can result in difficulty in making up one’s
mind. Losing the ability to make firm decisions and the loss of
faith can open the door to fear. Regardless of potential confusion,
it is beneficial in some respect to look at every possible aspect
of the situation you are in. This may provide an understanding
of just how another person may feel or react.
Keywords: Duality of observation or thought. Being able to see
both sides of a situation. Fear being the opposite of faith. People
peering and peeking. Secret service and government agencies.
Gunfights of the old west. Trench warfare. The media, the press,
paparazzi, spies, private detectives. Conspiracy theories. Crossed
eyes. Eavesdropping. Voyeurism.
The Caution: Confused by duality of thought. Failing to see
the integration and cohesion of more than one perspective.
Schizophrenia. Fear freezing up positive attitudes. Debates.
Stalemates. Making assumptions without the relevant information.
Quarrelling. Not seeing the light. Inability to agree. Bickering
with others or with one's self.
Virgo 10
Hearing both sides brings
enlightenment.Believing only
one side brings obscurity.
Wei Cheng
Keep your face to the sunshine
and you cannot see the
shadows.
Helen Keller
I don’t understand you.You
don’t understand me.What
else do we have in common?
Ashleigh Brilliant
Do I contradict myself?Very
well;I contradict myself.
WaltWhitman
Doubts are more cruel than the
worst of truths.
Anon
The optimist proclaims that we
live in the best of all possible
worlds,and the pessimist fears
this is true.
James Branch Cabell
That which we call sin in others,
is experiment for us.
RalphWaldo Emerson
We don’t see things as they are.
We see them as we are.
Anais Nin
Know that you are your own
greatest enemy,but also your
greatest friend.
JeremyTaylori

<<<PAGE 184>>>
VIRGO
I
161
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BOY MOLDED IN HIS MOTHER’S
ASPIRATIONS FOR HIM
Commentary: ‘A Boy Molded in His Mother’s Aspirations For Him’
is a Symbol of someone having to live up to the expectations of
parents or others. The ‘Mother’, or other authority figure, often
misses the point of the true potential of her offspring and may
be projecting her own unlived life. Can the ‘Boy’ live up to ‘His
Mother’s Aspirations’? Probably not, at least not all the time.
Oracle: Sometimes it’s fine to be ‘Molded’ by our parents, but
often this is not a true reflection of who we truly are or of our
own creative potentials. This being said, we still need to be aware
of what others expect from us—what ideals do people expect
us to embody and to live out? Once we’ve identified what ‘Mold’
we have allowed ourselves to be persuaded or projected into, we
can learn why we do certain things, often for others, and what
truly needs to be done in order to be faithful to our own inner
needs. It can be useful to know how and where the ‘Mold’ one’s
been poured into is appropriate and where it isn’t. The ‘Mother’
that has the ‘Aspirations’ can represent the expectations of a
single individual or it can show groups of individuals. Indeed,
society puts its own set of ideals and expectations on everyone,
at least in some way. This can go all the way from family, spouse
and friends, right through to other authority figures, such as the
government or the dictates of one’s country. The ‘Mother’ “out
there” may smother our true feelings of what we want to do,
often for reasons of social respectability and prestige. However,
if the ‘Aspirations’ are worth striving for, this can lead to a great
outcome, with people being proud of the person that one is
becoming.
Keywords: Being directed on the journey or shaped against one’s
free will. Plastic or cosmetic surgery. Building the physical or
emotional shape. Finding one’s way or destiny. Predetermined
destinies. Looking like one’s mother or father. The challenge
of individuality. DNA. Parents as patterns. Allowing others to
dictate who you are. Inherited values. Following in the family's
footsteps.
The Caution: Remaining tied to the apron strings of mother
or others. Conforming to social expectations. Not having a
clear sense of what one wants to be. Being a reflection of what
somebody else wants. Being a “mummy’s boy”. Not having the
free will of one’s own. Living the unlived life of the parents.
Squashed individuality. Letting down the side.
Virgo 11
Nothing has a stronger
influence psychologically
on their environment and
especially on their children than
the unlived life of the parent.
Carl Jung
My mother said to me,“If you
become a soldier you’ll be a
general;if you become a monk
you’ll end up as the pope.”
Instead,I became a painter and
wound up as Picasso.
Pablo Picasso
A child may have too much of
his mother’s blessing.
Proverb
I blame Rousseau,myself.“Man
is born free”,indeed.Man is not
born free;he is born attached to
his mother by a cord and is not
capable of looking after himself
for at least seven years (seventy
in some cases).
KatharineWhitehorn
For a man to achieve all that
is demanded of him he must
regard himself as greater than
he is.
Goethe
Conformity is the jailer of
freedom and the enemy of
growth.
John F.Kennedy
He that has no children brings
them up well.
Traditional Proverb

<<<PAGE 185>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
162
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BRIDE WITH HER VEIL SNATCHED
AWAY
Commentary: A ‘Bride With Her Veil Snatched Away’ is an image
of revelation, unveiling and discovery. Traditionally, ‘Brides’ have
been thought to be particularly vulnerable to evil spirits and the
‘Veil’ was thought to be able to outwit malevolent spirits. In some
countries the groom is not allowed to see the ‘Bride’s’ face until
after the ceremony. No matter what her situation, the ‘Bride’ is
now faced with the moment of moving into a new life and a new
sense of identity.
Oracle: This speaks of “taking the plunge” and making a
commitment to someone or something. It pictures a situation
where the past and the future collide. One cannot continue to
exist in limbo; the future has a stronger call than the past. This
Symbol can also indicate that you must show your true face or you
will be forced to reveal it. There may be a feeling that somebody
is not quite ready to give them self completely to the situation.
However, as they’ve made some form of commitment to what they
are doing, they don’t really have much choice. Being unable to
hide behind ‘Veils’, illusions, or pretense any longer means that
something will happen to break any resistance that may remain.
If one doesn’t go willingly, they may be pushed forward. Having
to act, or relate, regardless of excuses or hesitation, puts the
pressure on to move forward and to accept or reject the situation
they find themselves in, regardless of reservations. Those who
‘Snatch the Veil Away’ may not be acting in order to dominate
or overpower, but just trying to remove barriers in the way of
relating. It may be hesitation that is creating problems. Look to
your motives and those of others around you; be sure of why
they are doing what they do. Letting down your guard can open
up whole new worlds.
Keywords: Secret motives being revealed. Unveiling or changing
identity. Proving oneself with no excuses and no pretense.
Breaking down walls. Relating on a deep level. “Honeymoon
periods”. Being true to one’s self and others. Marriage rituals.
Dropping pretense. Divorce. Veils. Vows. The veil between the
conscious and unconscious.
The Caution: Stubbornly refusing to accept new directions.
Failing to commit. Not coming up with what one promised.
Feelings of violation. Not ready to give up fantasies or illusions.
Being used or exposed. Harsh realities. Mysteries that may be
best left that way. Withdrawal.
Virgo 12
Don’t compromise yourself.
You’re all you’ve got.
Janis Joplin
Heaven has no rage like love to
hatred turned,nor hell a fury
like a woman scorned.
William Congreve
Beware of all enterprises that
require new clothes.
Henry DavidThoreau
Grief walks upon the heels of
pleasure;married in haste,we
repent at leisure.
William Congreve
When a husband is embraced
without affection,there must be
some reason for it.
Hitopadesa
The honeymoon is over,baby,
it’s never gonna be that way
again.
The Cruel Sea
Personally,I hold that a
man,who deliberately and
intelligently takes a pledge
and then breaks it,forfeits his
manhood.
Mahatma Gandhi
A man in love is incomplete
until he is married.Then he is
finished.
Zsa Zsa Gabor
No one worth possessing can
be quite possessed.
SaraTeasdale

<<<PAGE 186>>>
VIRGO
I
163
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A POWERFUL STATESMAN
OVERCOMES A STATE OF POLITICAL
HYSTERIA
Commentary: ‘A Powerful Statesman Overcomes a State of
Political Hysteria’ pictures someone being able to take charge
or reign in energies that have gotten out of control. Indeed, as
there is some ‘Hysteria’ involved, something could have blown
out of all proportion to reality. The ‘Powerful Statesman’ may
be someone who is strong, charismatic and energetic, having a
powerful place in society or a position of strength. They have
a sense of authority, and others will listen to what they have to
say. A word from them can turn situations around with very little
apparent effort.
Oracle: You may find that your situation is whipped up as people
get carried away with the energy that’s around. There is a need
to get the upper hand to bring about a stabilized outcome—to
‘Overcome’ the ‘Hysteria’. It is through the ‘Power’ of the
personality, being the ‘Powerful Statesman’, that things can be
resolved and brought to a state of equilibrium. Regaining control
of one’s thoughts, psyche and emotions can ease tensions and
bring the situation back to normal. Changing one’s mind about an
issue that may have been overpowering can enable a whole new
view of your position in life to crystallize. Employing discipline
and control helps on a physical, mental or spiritual level. Looking
after the small problems as they arise can stop them turning into
issues that are larger, and more difficult to control. It is always
better to notice when things are beginning to get out of hand
or out of shape, not waiting until things are ‘Hysterically’ messy.
After all, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Call
on an your higher nature to regain control and bring the situation
back to normality.
Keywords: The power to sway the mob. Having the charisma and
talent to turn situations around. Elements of personality that get
out of control and take over. Pulling the rope tight. Mind control.
Political savvy. Knowing what to say and when to say it. Keeping
your mouth shut and ears open. Rhetoric. Putting out spot fires.
Being motivated. Issues of success.
The Caution: Conscious emotional manipulation and bullying.
Misusing energy. Swaying others to personal advantage. Being
aggressive, demanding and overbearing. Hypnotic persuasion.
Propaganda. Misinformation. Using “political speak” to control.
Emotional repression.
Virgo 13
To put the world in order,we
must first put the nation in
order;to put the nation in order,
we must put the family in order;
to put the family in order,we
must cultivate our personal life;
and to cultivate our personal
life,we must first set our hearts
right.
Confucius
A government is like fire,a
handy servant,but a dangerous
master.
GeorgeWashington
The worst tyrants are those
which establish themselves in
our own breasts.
William Ellery Channing
Today the nations of the
world may be divided into
two classes—the nations in
which the government fears
the people,and the nations
in which the people fear the
government.
Amos R.E.Pinochet
A fool gives full vent to his
anger,but a wise man keeps
himself under control.
Proverb
Political oratory is an art in
which nothing you say reveals
the fact that you’re saying
nothing.
Anon

<<<PAGE 187>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
164
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
FINELY LETTERED NAMES AND
MYSTERIOUS LINES ARE SEEN;IT IS A
FAMILY TREE
Commentary: ‘Finely Lettered Names and Mysterious Lines’ are
Seen; ‘It Is a Family Tree’. This Symbol gives the impression that
the ‘Family Tree’ is beautifully designed and mapped out. The
‘Tree’ has branches with names connecting to more and more
names as it goes back through the family history. There is often a
sense of nostalgia and grandeur with ‘Family Trees’. Many people
are fascinated, and sometimes amazed, by looking back to their
forefathers; where they came from, and who their close relations
were. Some members of the ‘Family’ will see the relevance and
importance of the history and the ‘Mystery’ of the ‘Family’ lineage;
meanwhile others may not even bother to look.
Oracle: There is a need to call upon the deeper and inherent
knowledge within. What’s been learnt from past experience,
possibly from one’s ancestral roots, will help you allocate your
greatest strength. This Symbol implies the need to feel links to a
‘Family’ heritage or the desire for the sense of security that it can
bring. If there is no strong sense of one’s own biological ‘Family’,
this can be found through associations with people of like mind,
or with those who share a common purpose in life. How do you
see your place in the grand scheme of things? Both physically and
spiritually, you carry the blood of all those who went before you.
How attached are you to your ‘Family’ and your origins? Where
have you come from? How do you feel about the role you have in
your ‘Family’? Do you feel involved, wanted and loved? Proving
yourself and your bloodline can lead to a stronger sense of self,
belonging and an understanding of how you fit in.
Keywords: Strength in tradition. Belonging to a lineage. The
story of where one comes from. Issues of pride of heritage.
The importance of parents and family. Branches in databases.
Having strong and secure roots. Origins and their relevance to
today’s life. Ancestors. Calligraphy. Fine pens. Filling in the gaps.
Adoptions. Step families. Pedigrees. Kin. Genealogy. Inheritance.
Family Bibles.
TheCaution: Disassociation or disconnection from family history.
Exclusivity or snobbery. Feeling like an alien. Feeling, or being,
a stranger in a strange world. Orphans. Not knowing where one
came from. Being stuck with people you don’t know. Examining
roots. Missing identities. Skeletons in the closet.
Virgo 14
Every time a baby is born,so is a
grandmother.
Anon
To“be”means to be related.
Alfred Korzybski
Call it a clan,call it a network,
call it a tribe,call it a family:
Whatever you call it,whoever
you are,you need one.
Jane Howard
Be tolerant of the human race.
Your whole family belongs to
it—and some of your spouse’s
family does too.
Anon
If you don’t believe in ghosts,
you’ve never been to a family
reunion.
Ashleigh Brilliant
It is of no consequence of what
parents a man is born,so he be
a man of merit.
Horace
Everyone has something
ancestral,even if it is nothing
more than a disease.
Ed Howe
Everyone has ancestors and it
is only a question of going back
far enough to find a good one.
Howard Kenneth Nixon
Remember as far as anyone
knows,we’re a nice normal
family.
Homer Simpson

<<<PAGE 188>>>
VIRGO
I
165
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FINE LACE ORNAMENTAL
HANDKERCHIEF
Commentary: A ‘Fine Lace Ornamental Handkerchief’ is a
beautiful, soft, lacy image. A ‘Lace Handkerchief’ is an extremely
feminine and personal possession associated with perfume, tears
and matters of the heart. Since medieval times, women have given
their loved ones this small token of their love and commitment
before they went into battle or traveled abroad. The scent of the
“fabric” and the care and loving that have gone into the crafting
of it give a sense of security and being remembered and loved.
We are often amazed by how much attention to detail, care and
thought goes into making something so beautiful, small and
delicate. Even small gifts can bring a sense of love and care;
they can become very sentimental. The smallest tokens of our
past can bring us a sense of security and joy.
Oracle: At the moment you may be feeling the want for love and
the need for someone in your life. You need to relax a little in
order to invite others in. The feeling of being lost and left behind
can be relieved with the touch of fabric, a whiff of perfume,
etc.; these can be a reminder of people or events past. Warm,
sentimental feelings can be expressed, or poured out, showing
tenderness and care. Carrying a beautiful lace handkerchief might
be a nice way to remind yourself of your true sense of worth
and beauty. However, this type of ‘Handkerchief’, being made
of ‘Lace’, is not really suited for too many tears, as it can be more
of an ornament that a true ‘Handkerchief’. Hence, there can be a
sense of false emotion evident with this Symbol. Sometimes we
get upset about things that needn’t really upset us, or we put on an
emotional show because we feel it’s expected of us. Being wound
up and constantly “upset” or demanding emotional attention can
put people off. Staying true to your emotions and remembering
your self-worth may be very important now.
Keywords: Delicacy of feeling. Attention to detail. Winning
awards through valor. Hypersensitivity. Looking but not touching.
Overdressing. Appearing too delicate to truly enjoy life. Make-
up and accessories. Fragility. Old things of lace and beauty.
Refinement. Small gifts given with deep feeling.
The Caution: The artificial sob story. False sympathy. Asking
for love when in reality one doesn’t really want it. Impractical
belongings. Things that get shunted aside as irrelevant,
unworthy or unusable. Things of little use in today’s world. Mass
manufacturing. Things made in sweatshops.
Virgo 15
If you are not too long,I will
wait here for you all my life.
OscarWilde
I wear my heart on my sleeve.
Diana—Princess ofWales
HANDKERCHIEF,n.A small
square of silk or linen,used
in various ignoble offices
about the face and especially
serviceable at funerals to
conceal the lack of tears.
Ambrose Bierce
A diplomat is a man who
always remembers a woman’s
birthday but never her age.
Robert Frost
A little sincerity is a dangerous
thing,and a great deal of it is
absolutely fatal.
OscarWilde
Fame is the perfume of heroic
deeds.
Socrates
So,as you go into battle,
remember your ancestors and
remember your descendants.
Publius CorneliusTacitus
No duty is more urgent than
that of returning thanks.
St.Ambrose
The better part of valor is
discretion.
Shakespeare

<<<PAGE 189>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
166
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DELIGHTED CHILDREN CROWD
AROUND THE ORANGUTAN CAGE IN
A ZOO
Commentary: ‘Delighted Children Crowd Around the Orangutan
Cage in a Zoo’, pictures young people pressing together to observe
intriguing and wonderful animals that are unusual to them. They
don’t have a chance to see these animals in their everyday life.
Grown ‘Orangutans’ are very similar to ‘Children’, they are said to
have a similar mental capacity to that of a five year-old. ‘Children’
havegreatfunwatchingtheirantics.The‘Orangutan’canalsobeseen
observing the ‘Children’. The responses of wonder and curiosity are
obviouslyevidentinthe‘DelightedChildren’,butmaywellbewhatthe
‘Orangutan’ are also experiencing. The ‘Children’ watch to see what
will happen and they take pleasure in the things they can relate to.
Oracle: This Symbol expresses the desire to relate across gulfs of
differencesthatareveryobviousbetweendifferentspecies.Observing
the life of an ‘Orangutan’ is like looking into an evolutionary mirror.
We are able to see where we have been, how differently we relate to
the world, and how we have chosen to deal with our environment. It
is not a matter of the human species being better. Indeed, one comes
torealizethedegreeofsimilarity.Sometimespeopleweencounterin
life seem to be from a different species (or planet!) and have a totally
opposite perspective of life, leading to completely different ways of
actingandreacting.Itcan,attimes,leadtoafeelingofseparation,but
there is value in remaining aware of and appreciating the similarities
and common ground along with the differences. There may need to
be a “primitive”, or ‘Childlike’ response. It is also by facing the baser
instincts that you can realize a fresh, new approach to those around
you.
Keywords: Karmic confrontations between the creatively integrated
and the unevolved. Objects of derision, fascination or worship.
Showing off or acting to get a reaction from others. Trying to relate
toothersthatdon’tunderstand.Feelinglikeoneisinazoo.Observing
others.Curiosity.Crowdingaround.Everyonewantingtohavealook.
Going by instincts. Television shows such as Jerry Springer. News
networks. The media. Lack of social inhibition.
The Caution: Egoistic feelings of being better or in a higher state of
evolution. Having no place for privacy. Gaping at others. Taunting
people. Daring others to do something outrageous or animal-like.
Making fun of people. Building cages. Hiding from view. Fences and
barriers.Theintrusionofthemedia(beatingupstories).Elicitingsick
behavior from others.
Virgo 16
There are 193 living species
of monkeys and apes.192 of
them are covered with hair.
The exception is a naked ape,
self-named homo sapiens.
Desmond Morris
The city is not a concrete jungle,
it is a human zoo.
Desmond Morris
Be tolerant of the human race.
Your whole family belongs to
it – and some of your spouse’s
family does too.
Anon
I am a creationist;I refuse
to believe that I could have
evolved from humans.
Anon
To be human is to keep rattling
the bars of the cage of existence
hollering,“What’s it for?”
Robert Fulghum
Man must realize his own
unimportance before he can
appreciate his importance.
R.M.Baumgardy
If an animal does something,
we call it instinct;if we do the
same thing for the same reason,
we call it intelligence.
Will Cuppy
If we evolved from the monkeys,
why are there still monkeys?
Kathleen Madigan

<<<PAGE 190>>>
VIRGO
I
167
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A VOLCANIC ERUPTION BRINGING
DUST CLOUDS,FLOWING LAVA,
EARTH RUMBLINGS
Commentary: ‘A Volcanic Eruption’ is ‘Bringing Dust Clouds,
Flowing Lava and Earth Rumblings’. The ‘Volcano’ may have been
threatening to erupt for some time, but now it’s actually doing it.
The ‘Earth Rumblings’ imply possible threats of further, perhaps
more life changing, even catastrophic blasts; only time will tell.
Oracle: Somebody or something may have been holding things
inside until a powerful force has built up to the point where there
can be no more resistance and everything is thrown, spewed or
forced out. This ‘Eruption’ could be expressed as anger, but also in
the explosive form of ideas, beliefs, goals and insights. It is often
best just to let it blow; resisting the urge can cause enormous
pressure to build which can be harmful in many ways. However,
one needs to keep a watchful eye on the situation so things don’t get
out of control, leading to hysteria and dramatic reactions. Things
can get out of control very quickly. This often leaves “rubble”, or
mess, everywhere to be cleaned up. Watch out for overreactions.
Is the force of emotions really related to the current situation?
Having or regaining complete control is possibly out of the question
until things settle down and the danger is past. There can be a
sense of relief when the realization of surviving such a situation
sinks in. Sometimes, after we’ve been through a major shakeup
and rattling in our lives, we can feel a sense of gratitude and calm
and peace is restored. You may find yourself in a whole new place
or having extraordinary experiences on every level – physical,
emotional, spiritual or mental. Whatever has erupted may have
been building up for years. There can be fertile soil after the ‘Lava’
has flowed—soil that can contain nutrients and riches from deep
down inside your mind and body. What is coming out from within?
What transformations can come from this?
Keywords: Thoughts or ideas pouring out. Torrents of thought or
emotion. Anger that needs expression. Eruptions that are quickly
overcome. Pressure cooker environments. After shocks. Waiting
for the dust to settle. Cathartic release. Volcanoes. Earthquakes.
Earth tremors. Rumblings. Earth changes. Dust
The Caution: Suppression of anger or energy to the point of
explosive disaster. Tantrums. Choking the air with sulfurous
dust-clouds. Holding things inside. Overreactions. Spewing one’s
insides. Flipping out. Events that throw out shocking news or
emotions.
Virgo 17
As in an explosion,I would
erupt with all the wonderful
things I saw and understood in
this world.
Boris Pasternak
You can have anything you
want if you want it desperately
enough.You must want it with
an inner exuberance that erupts
through the skin and joins the
energy that created the world.
Sheilah Graham
When the habitually even-
tempered suddenly fly into a
passion,that explosion is apt
to be more impressive than the
outburst of the most violent
amongst us.
Margery Allingham
If you go in for argument,take
care of your temper.Your logic,
if you have any,will take care
of itself.
Joseph Farrell
Californians are good at
planning for the earthquake,
while simultaneously denying it
will happen.
Sheila Ballantyne
The human race likes to give
itself airs.One good volcano
can produce more greenhouse
gases in a year than the human
race has in its entire history.
Ray Bradbury

<<<PAGE 191>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
168
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO GIRLS PLAYING WITH A OUIJA
BOARD
Commentary: ‘Two Girls Playing With a Ouija Board’. The ‘Girls’ are
curious to see what will happen if they contact spirits on the “other
side”. Indeed, it is said that it was ‘Two Girls’ who popularized the
Ouija Board in 1848. They were sisters from Hydesville, New York.
They became instant celebrities and sparked a national obsession
that spread all across the United States and Europe, signaling the
birth of modern spiritualism.
Oracle: Here, the ‘Two Girls’ shows that there may be a need to
share your thoughts, explorations, dreams and ideas with another.
They are ‘Playing With a Ouija Board’—there is a desire to contact
a deeper wisdom, possibly by the use of some kind of divinational
tool. You may need some form of assistance to help you focus on any
messages that are coming through. This “tool” can be many things; a
Ouija board, the Sabian Symbols, the I Ching, the tarot, etc. Wisdom
and knowledge may come with time, serious intent and effort. At
first, there may be rather youthful and naïve attempts to discover the
deepermeaningoflife.Thingsmaybecomealittlestrange;therecan
be little control over what is coming through from “the other side”.
You may have to just sit and observe. Sometimes there’s a need to
explore these realms with others and there is often something scary
about them. What is likely to happen if you leave yourself open and
vulnerable? This Symbol can suggest the need to be with someone
who shares the same beliefs and interests in life, and to have the
curiosity to find out things that may not be immediately apparent. If
someone you are in partnership with is reluctant to see things from
a similar spiritual or esoteric perspective as you, you might find the
relationship breaking down. One partner may be more “straight”,
the other more eager to take a chance and explore.
Keywords: Immature curiosity leading to messages and inner
guidance. Listening devices. Tuning into possible meanings. Ouija
boards. Séances. Clairvoyant abilities. Spirits of the departed.
Contact with the “other side”. Messages coming through from
unknownsources.Spiritualism.Ectoplasms.Concentratedattention.
Poltergeists.Hauntedhouses.Coldenergies.Bringingspiritthrough.
Moving furniture. Phenomena. Weird and spooky. Seeing ghosts.
Being a channel.
TheCaution:Dealingwithsituationsbeyondone’smaturity.Looking
for information instead of getting on with life. Naive playing with
potentially dangerous elements. Seeking easy answers to avoid
responsibility. Fooling around. Superstitious responses to natural
phenomena.
Virgo 18
If I waited to be right before I
spoke,I would be sending little
cryptic messages on the Ouija
board,complaints from the
other side.
Audre Lorde
Imagination is the outreaching
of mind ...the bombardment of
the conscious mind with ideas,
impulses,images and every sort
of psychic phenomena welling
up from the preconscious.It is
the capacity to dream dreams
and see visions.
Rollo May
People need hard times and
oppression to develop psychic
muscles.
Frank Herbert
In my writing I am acting as
a map maker,an explorer of
psychic areas...a cosmonaut
of inner space,and I see no
point in exploring areas that
have already been thoroughly
surveyed.
William S.Burroughs
Is there a spirit present?
Standard Ouija board
question
You must pray carefully and
for the very essence of your
desire or you will be caught up
in many musings of things you
may not want for your own
experience.
Ouija message

<<<PAGE 192>>>
VIRGO
I
169
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SWIMMING RACE
Commentary: A ‘Swimming Race’ is an image of people
competing against each other in order to win some award, medal,
recognition or goal. Each has to win their own ‘Race’ and go as
hard as they possibly can for the objective. Rules and regulations
have to be followed, otherwise they face the possibility of being
“disqualified” from participating.
Oracle: You may find yourself in competition with others or
working your way through conflicting emotions and hoping to
win, or come out on top. It is through hard work, practice and the
control of your self and emotions that success can be achieved.
The lessons learnt through your training must be called on now.
Have faith in yourself and your abilities that you can win. You
may be working hard at achieving the win for rewards in the
larger picture (for club, school, country) or winning the race with
purely personal gains in mind. If it’s an intellectual or emotional
‘Race’ that you’re competing in, it may at times be easier to let
the other “win”. Although winning can be really wonderful, a
feeling of constant competition and the desire to come out on top
can wear you and others down, and take the joy and spontaneity
out of life. Plus, there are no real winners when people compete
emotionally. Is the situation facing you worth the effort you must
put in? If it is, take a deep breath and go for it with all your might.
If someone is just trying to outdo you, you might decide to pull
out and let him or her go for it. People can’t win against you if
you’re not competing against them and a refusal to compete may
take the wind out of their sails. The best way to win is to run
your own race, compete against yourself and always do your
best. Looking sideways at others to see how they’re doing can
slow you down and weaken your performance. Look ahead and
go for your own objectives, doing the best you can is the best
you can do, after all!
Keywords: Looking sideways to see how others are coping
with the strain of competition. Competing with one’s emotions.
Capitalism. The striving for first place or greatness. Swimming,
sports, competition. Wanting to be first at everything. Learning
how fit one is. Concentrating on the goal. Medals and awards.
Training and practice. Showing your abilities in front of others.
The Caution: Allowing the competitive spirit to dominate
emotional sensitivity. Always going for “the win”. Trying to outdo
each other. Being on the go all the time. Bad sportsmanship. Not
knowing how to lose. Wanting always to conquer others. Always
seeing others as competitors.
Virgo 19
In between goals is a thing
called life,that has to be lived
and enjoyed.
Sid Caesar
Picture yourself vividly as
winning,and that alone will
contribute immeasurably to
success.
Harry Emerson Fosdick
The battles that count aren’t
the ones for gold medals.The
struggles within yourself—the
invisible,inevitable battles inside
all of us—that’s where it’s at.
Jesse Owens
When you are content to
be simply yourself and
don’t compare or compete,
everybody will respect you.
Lao-Tzu
The difference between a hero
and an also—ran is the guy
who hangs on for one last gasp.
Paul Dietzel
Of all human powers operating
on the affairs of mankind,
none is greater than that of
competition.
Henry Clay
Live daringly,boldly,fearlessly.
Taste the relish to be found in
competition – in having put
forth the best within you.
Henry J.Kaiser

<<<PAGE 193>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
170
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CARAVAN OF CARS HEADED FOR
PROMISED LANDS
Commentary: ‘A Caravan of Cars Headed for Promised Lands’
shows a group of people setting out on a journey to a better place
or a better way of life. They’ve probably heard word that life is
more promising in some distant place and they’re packed up and
are moving in that direction. The ‘Promised Lands’ can literally
mean the west coast of America; however, in general terms it
means a land that contains some reward, a new way of living.
Oracle: There is a feeling of the need to move on to new thoughts,
new ways of doing things, possibly even a new way of life, but you
are unlikely to be alone. As this is ‘A Caravan of Cars’ there are
probably several others who share the same desires and impulses.
Setting out on a new venture can feel very exciting, especially
if friends, family or colleagues are as enthusiastic as you are. It
may not be a matter of whether these ‘Promised Lands’ have
real guarantees of satisfaction or reward, but there’s the need,
or desire, to explore these fresh opportunities for the potentials
they may hold. The simple act of moving to overcome stagnant
lifestyles can create the possibility of some kind of ‘Promise’.
Making a commitment to overcome dull routines and leave the
past behind with those who share a like mind and intention may
be all that is necessary to open the path to a new reality. Heading
for the future with a keen sense of excitement and anticipation
can open you up to all sorts of possibilities and hope. Some kind
of new ‘Land’ or opportunity is an inevitable outcome of this
change. Indeed, it can lead to a whole new life. This being said,
one should stop for a moment and ponder the reasons for moving
on. Do you have to leave loved ones behind in this quest? Is this
quest based in reality, or is it something that has more ‘Promise’
than reality?
Keywords: Venturing into life with like-minded companions. The
support of others in a quest for the future. Seeking new territory.
Rallies and caravans of cars. Exchanging money. Commerce.
Buses, caravans, trucks, etc. Leaving behind the known for the
unknown. Gypsies. Hollywood. California. “Boom” towns. The
“magic bus”. Conferences.
The Caution: Forsaking the individual path in favor of a more
secure, common one. Perpetuating restlessness. Constantly
seekingthe“potofgold”.Far-offlands.Inabilitytosettleanywhere.
Being a rolling-stone. Forsaking lasting relationships. Crazy goose
chases. Running away from problems. Fear of flying.
Virgo 20
Wherever you go,go with all
your heart.
Confucius
Go for it now.The future is
promised to no one.
Wayne Dyer
Hitch your wagon to a star.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Those that say you can’t take
it with you never saw a car
packed for a vacation trip.
Anon
It is a curious thing that every
creed promises a paradise
which will be absolutely
uninhabitable for anyone of
civilized taste.
EvelynWaugh
We were all on this ship in the
sixties,our generation,a ship
going to discover the New
World.
John Lennon
For where does one run to when
he’s already in the Promised
Land?
Claude Brown
A nomad I will remain for
life,in love with distant and
uncharted places.
Isabelle Eberhardt
The Promised Land guarantees
nothing.It is only an
opportunity,not a deliverance.
Shelby Steele

<<<PAGE 194>>>
VIRGO
I
171
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GIRL’S BASKETBALL TEAM
Commentary: ‘A Girl’s Basketball Team’ is pictured. They may be
lighthearted about their game, enjoying the fun, the friendship,
and the sportsmanship. Whether this is a professional or amateur
game, there is a need to cooperate with others and to play by
the rules of the game to achieve the 'Team’s' goals. Some on the
'Team' however, may take the outcome very seriously, like it's a
“life and death” situation. Playing the game to the best of their
ability is necessary, as they will be judged by the others in the
team, their coach and those on the sidelines. Popularity is often a
factor, with some on the ‘Team’ being star players and trendsetters
and others merely making up the numbers, there to close the
gaps and pass the ball.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, working with friends and
those with similar interests will enable you to join together to
achieve a mutually desired end. Which role do you play in the
“game”? Are you happy with your status in the ‘Team’? Do you get
recognition for the part you play or for what you do, or do you
blend into the crowd, not standing out in any way? Regardless of
outcomes, there’s a need to enjoy the game and encourage group
cohesion. Are people hogging the ball, or are they being fair and
passing it when necessary? Are enough people getting to really
play the game? Are people passing the ball to each other fairly?
Is this a social game or are the stakes much higher? Do outcomes
seem very serious? Whatever, respecting each other and giving
each other a fair crack at having their moment of glory is the
best for all concerned. Do you want to be a star player or be in
a ‘Team’ of stars? Without team-effort no one will get to be on a
star ‘Team’ because it takes "teamwork" to shine and win. Look
at how you and others play the game.
Keywords: The give and take of unity and equality. Everyone
getting to play the game. Joyful participation. Friendship and
sport. Fast footwork. Winning and losing. Being in the team.
Playing fair and square. Coaching and practice. The need for a
level playing ground. Uniforms. Codes of behaviour and play.
Locker room antics.
The Caution: Forcing others to compete on the same level
without regard for differences. Finding it difficult to play by the
rules or cooperate. Bitchiness and rivalry taking the fun out of
playing. Petulance and spitting the pacifier. Some being stars
while others are merely drones. Taking things too seriously.
Tantrums. The desire to win at all costs.
Virgo 21
Please don’t ask me what the
score is;I’m not even sure what
the game is.
Ashleigh Brilliant
A particular shot or way of
moving the ball can be a
player’s personal signature,
but efficiency of performance
is what wins the game for the
team.
Pat Riley
A team should never practice
on a field that is not lined.Your
players have to become aware
of the field’s boundaries.
John Madden
If a team is to reach its
potential,each player must
be willing to subordinate his
personal goals to the good of
the team.
BudWilkinson
Individual commitment
to a group effort—that is
what makes a team work,a
company work,a society work,
a civilization work.
Vince Lombardi
One man can be a crucial
ingredient on a team,but one
man cannot make a team.
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
Life begins when you get out of
the grandstand into the game.
P.L.Debevoise

<<<PAGE 195>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
172
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A ROYAL COAT OF ARMS ENRICHED
WITH PRECIOUS STONES
Commentary: A ‘Royal Coat of Arms Enriched With Precious
Stones’ is shown. The term a ‘Coat of Arms', refers to the custom
originating in the 11th to 15th centuries, in England, of knights
displaying their ‘Arms’ on a tunic or coat worn over armor for
identification. Royalty bestowed the ‘Royal Coats of Arms’. The
design of individual ‘Coats of Arms’ varies, but all include things
such as animals, words, and colors. Along with people, towns,
regions and countries can have ‘Coats of Arms’.
Oracle: There is a strong connection to heritage, one’s lineage and
ancestors. This can give rise to feelings or pride and honor. There
are things to stand up for and to represent. Being true to your
heritage or beliefs will empower you with strength and stability.
There can be the appearance, or the impression of, wealth, no
matter what the actual financial status. There is a need to project
a sense of nobility of character, pride and confidence as adopting
these strengths will see you through this situation. Sometimes
someone believes that they’re “above” everyone else and they
lord it over others believing they have a “god given right” to be in
charge, bully or call the shots. In situations of trouble, difficulty
or betrayal (in fact any challenging emotion), falling back on a
belief of your own ‘”royalty”, combined with a good sense of self
worth and who you are will help you get through with grace and
without incurring bad blood or enemies or letting yourself down.
Displaying markings of noble status and bearing, even if this is
just in your behavior, can lead others to see and believe in your
beauty, talent and worth.
Keywords: A long lineage standing behind. Social stratas.
Royalty. Issues of social standing and identity. Having a regal
bearing. Aristocratic status. Nobility. Coats of Arms. Strength of
association. Pure blood. Ancestors of worth or note. Hereditary
lines. Having rights and prestige. Pageantry. Knights jousting.
Inheritances. Wealthy lineage. Displays of grace and honor. Beauty
and wealth no matter what the status. Tartans. Precious stones.
Shields. Inscriptions.
TheCaution: Superficial judgment on one’s ancestry. Believing in
privileges for the select few. Seeing others as not being worthy.
Class-consciousness. Snobbery. Having “slaves” to do everything.
Being “in the club”. Elite school snobbery. Bastardizing others.
Feeling above everyone because of lineage.
Virgo 22
Every king springs from a race
of slaves,and every slave has
had kings among his ancestors.
Plato
There is no king who has
not had a slave among his
ancestors,and no slave who has
not had a king among his.Helen
Keller
Dignity is not negotiable.Dignity
is the honor of the family.
Vartan Gregorian
When I want a peerage,I shall
buy one like an honest man.
Lord Northcliffe
Nobility has its obligations.
Duc De Levis
We are not a family,we’re a firm.
GeorgeVI
It is indeed a desirable thing
to be well descended,but the
glory belongs to our ancestors.
Plutarch
My mother told me I was
blessed,and I have always
taken her word for it.Being
born of—or reincarnated from
—royalty is nothing like being
blessed.Royalty is inherited
from another human being;
blessedness comes from God.
Duke Ellington
Honor wears different coats to
different eyes.
BarbaraTuchman

<<<PAGE 196>>>
VIRGO
I
173
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LION-TAMER RUSHES FEARLESSLY
INTO THE CIRCUS ARENA
Commentary: ‘A Lion-Tamer’ is seen. He ‘Rushes Fearlessly into
the Circus Arena’. The ‘Lion-Tamer’ needs to really know what
he’s doing; if not, he could be putting his life on the line. Not only
does he have to be completely professional; he also has to be sure
of his skill and display a complete lack of fear. Weakness of any
description can have disastrous consequences.
Oracle: With this degree, there’s a need for self-discipline and
mastery. Being prepared to take on things that are “unknown” or
risky, may lead to excitement, but how much is being risked in
order to accept the challenge? One has to be cautious with every
move, as there’s the need to anticipate every type of outcome or
eventuality. In order to survive or “win” in this situation, there’s
a need to bite the bullet and to put fears behind you. It is not that
you need to extinguish powerful emotions and energies, but by
skillfully manipulating things, the outcome will see you being
the one in charge. As long as you’re aware of all the possible
consequences, things should turn out okay. However, with this
Symbol, there is a question as to what degree the risks are real and
to what degree they are imagined. It is common for the lions to
be well fed by the ‘Lion-Tamer’ before he ventures into the arena,
reducing any real risk of danger. The audience, oblivious of the
methods the ‘Lion-Tamer’ utilizes or undertakes, are gripped by
their own fears or the way they believe they would act if they were
in his place Hence, this Symbol can reflect that you are allowing
others to think you are braver, and taking more risks than you really
are. This can give you an advantage over others for a while, but the
"audience" can easily become disillusioned if the truth becomes
known. Whatever, how prepared are you for what may happen?
Once you’re out there, in the ‘Circus Arena’, you’re committed to
it, with no easy turning back.
Keywords: Having faith and courage in your abilities. Sublimating
animal instincts. Control. Fearlessness. Professionalism. Extremism.
Adrenaline rushes. Dangerous spectacles. Training and conditioned
responses. Restrained passion. Coordination and skill. Superheroes.
Holding the whip.
The Caution: Needing to be in control. Believing that things are
dependent on your direction. Showing off and boasting. Plunging
into situations, physically or emotionally, that are inherently
dangerous without regard for the consequences. Overplaying one’s
abilities. Dominant attitudes. Taking on anything and anyone.
Virgo 23
A great part of courage is the
courage of having done the
thing before.
RalphWaldo Emerson
CIRCUS,n.A place where horses,
ponies and elephants are
permitted to see men,women
and children acting the fool.
Ambrose Bierce
Nothing noble is done without
risk.
Andre Gide
The wicked flee when no one
pursues,but the righteous are
bold as a lion.
Traditional Proverb
Half the failures of this world
arise from pulling in one’s horse
as he is leaping.
AugustusW.Hare
Love is the only force capable
of transforming an enemy into
a friend.
Martin Luther King,Jr
Mankind are animals that
make bargains,no other animal
does this.
Adam Smith
My contributions were many:
First clown director,with
witty sayings and flashily
dressed,now called master of
ceremonies.
Jelly Roll Morton

<<<PAGE 197>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
174
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
MARY AND HER WHITE LAMB
Commentary: ‘Mary and Her White Lamb’ is a Symbol reflecting
innocence and purity. It is derived from an old nursery rhyme;
‘Mary’s White Lamb’ followed 'Mary' wherever she might
go. They had a very strong bond between them. The 'Lamb'
seemed to be very taken by 'Mary' as was 'Mary' by the Lamb.
There is a strong sense, a need to be watchful for dependent or
codependent behavior with others. This story shows a strong
sense of attachment and dependence.
Oracle: Is someone following someone else around, or acting
like a doe-eyed lamb? Maybe they are constantly checking on
the other, wanting to know their every move. Are they trying to
monopolize someone, whilst excluding others? If one were to
leave the scene, how would the other react? Sometimes, what
seems to be “codependent” behavior is someone merely looking
out for your best interests, so don’t assume the worst right away.
Look at their motives, or your own, for that matter, for any clingy
behavior and assess why they are behaving the way they are.
Having a belief in the integrity of people and the purity of their
motives can bring joy and a sense of belonging. There is usually a
strong feeling of kindness and softness with this Symbol. Keeping
a sense of innocence, purity and honesty in the situation will lift
you up and out of any problems. Being kind and yet firm, loving
and yet a separate individual and sharing without losing your
boundaries can lead to a wonderful, pure experience of love and
friendship. There’s a need for imagination mixed with simplicity.
However, there can be a feeling of being “lost” in the wilderness
when there’s no support or reassurance from others. In terms of
relationships, there can be an imbalance where one person looks
up to the other. Be watchful to see if anyone is giving away their
power in this situation.
Keywords: Simple childlike innocence or pure escapism. Naivety.
The Mary and Jesus story. Dependence. Kindness. Friendship.
Bonds between pets and owners. Believing in the essential
goodness of others. Hanging out with people. Looking out for
someone. Cuteness. The urge to prove something. Dislike of dirt
or grime. Being ‘addicted’ to someone or something.
The Caution: Naiveté. Avoiding real issues. Stalking.
Overprotection. Doubting motives. Paranoia that someone is
following you. Feeling lost without the other. Doe-eyed attraction.
Clinging to people. Arousing jealousy through favoritism. Not
leaving people alone. Checking people’s whereabouts. Not
growing up. Being the black sheep.
Virgo 24
Manifest plainness,
Embrace simplicity,
Reduce selfishness,
Have few desires.
Lao-Tzu
There are perhaps no days
of our childhood we lived so
fully as those we spent with a
favorite book.
Marcel Proust
A man’s action is only a picture
book of his creed.
RalphWaldo Emerson
The only gift is a portion of
thyself...the poet brings his
poem;the shepherd his lamb.
RalphWaldo Emerson
So much perfection argues
rottenness somewhere.
BeatriceWebb
Mary had a little lamb,
Its fleece was white as snow;
And everywhere that Mary
went
The lamb was sure to go.
Nursery rhyme
Mary had a little lamb.
The doctor was surprised.
Urban joke
A loving heart is the truest
wisdom.
Charles Dickens

<<<PAGE 198>>>
VIRGO
I
175
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FLAG AT HALF-MAST IN FRONT OF
A PUBLIC BUILDING
Commentary: ‘A Flag at Half-Mast in Front of a Public Building’ is
a Symbol of accomplishment and achievement coupled with the
loss or mourning for someone or something that has died, been
completed or abandoned in some way. It can picture carrying
a task through to completion. Now it is time for recognition of
what’s been accomplished during the life that's been lived. This
Symbol can sometimes produce a feeling of loss, like something
has passed from one’s life.
Oracle: This Symbol reflects the need for the acknowledgement
or public display of something that has passed on or disappeared
from your life. It may be important to let others know that there
has been a change of some kind or a passing on. This may be a
lonely passage or it may involve many others. The display should
not be noisy or overt, but a show of respect and accepted as a
normal part of life. This means that you don’t have to hide or
pretend that nothing has happened. Others may prefer to have a
simple and respectful sign that brings the loss to their attention.
This allows for understanding without the embarrassment of
saying or doing the wrong thing in what may be a sensitive and
emotional time for both yourself and others. The fact that this
‘Flag’ is in ‘Front of a Public Building’ implies that this passing
away may have importance to many in the community. People,
or groups wearing a black armband are similar to the flag at
‘Half-Mast’. Grieving may be a necessary part of the process, but
it is also a time for assimilating what it took to get you where
you are.
Keywords: Public tribute and recognition. Political affairs.
The desire to leave a legacy to society. Having the power to
sway the masses or authorities. Signs for all to see. Destinies
fulfilled. Coming together as a community or nation to share loss.
Judgment on one’s life. Appraisal of deeds and character. Public
holidays. Obituaries. Taking the time to grieve. Black armbands.
Institutions that are closed. Mourning the loss of somebody
greatly admired.
The Caution: Feeling an obligation to carry on without taking
time to sort out issues from the past or mourn any loss.
Devastation and mourning. The burning desire to leave behind
something no matter what the cost. Things coming to a standstill.
Crocodile tears for what's passed away. Hypocritical mourning
for the chosen few.
Virgo 25
The monument of a great man
is not of granite or marble
or bronze.It consists of his
goodness,his deeds,his love
and his compassion.
Alfred A.Montapert
A life spent in constant labor
is a life wasted,save a man
be such a fool as to regard a
fulsome obituary notice as
ample reward.
George Jean Nathan
To be remembered after we are
dead is but poor recompense
for being treated with contempt
while we are living.
William Hazlitt
If I have done any deed worthy
of remembrance,that deed will
be my monument.If not,no
monument can preserve my
memory.
Agesilaus II
If your contribution has been
vital there will always be
somebody to pick up where you
left off,and that will be your
claim to immortality.
Walter Gropius
It matters not how a man dies,
but how he lives.
Samuel Johnson
The past is utterly indifferent to
its worshippers.
WilliamWinter

<<<PAGE 199>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
176
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BOY WITH A CENSER SERVES NEAR
THE PRIEST AT THE ALTAR
Commentary: ‘A Boy’ is shown with a ‘Censer’. He ‘Serves Near the
Priest at the Altar’. The ‘Boy’ doesn’t have the experience or social
position of the ‘Priest’, but that shouldn’t put him off his duties. His
position and responsibilities are still important. In a Catholic church
service, wine is drunk as a symbol of the blood of Christ. Wafers
are placed on the tongues of the believers as the representation of
the body of Christ. How the ‘Boy’ reacts to the ritual or ceremony
will depend on his upbringing, beliefs or temperament. He could
be rapt with fascination at what is being played out or he could be
indifferent, bored and really preferring to go home. It is unclear
whether the ‘Boy’ wants to eventually take the position of the older
‘Priest’, or colleague, or not. He may grow up to do other things, but
right now he’s got his position or duty to fulfill. This may be less
than he’s actually able to do or is truly “qualified” to do.
Oracle: Be cautious of feeling that what you are doing is
inconsequential; even the smallest contribution is an important
part of the whole and we all play our part in some measure.
Sometimes there’s the need to wait things out until one is more
mature, practiced or prepared to be in charge. Right now you may
be someone’s “right-hand man” and not in charge of proceedings. A
more exalted position will be attained, given time. Give reverence
and respect to your everyday routines, no matter how insignificant
they seem and you will find your sense of hope renewed. However,
watch out for any feelings of jealousy that someone is bigger, better,
more experienced or more respected than the other. Measuring
one’s self by the successes of others can be useful, except when it
degrades your belief in yourself, or in others. In your situation who
is the ‘Priest’ and who is the ‘Boy’?
Keywords: Youthful attitudes. Doing what’s simple, with silence
and devotion. Participating in the toil but not the glory. Altars
and shrines. Incense. Burning candles. Passing down wisdom
and knowledge. Looking up to those in power. Work experience.
Apprenticeships. Feelings of awe and respect. Religious and social
ceremonies. Issues of authority and the abuse of it.
TheCaution: Being dominated by spiritual hierarchy that is devised
by human rationalism. Doing “lesser things” to avoid responsibility.
Not taking a place of authority when one could or should. Feeling
notgoodenoughbecauseofinexperience.Someonealwayshanging
around. Incompetence. Refusal to take instruction. Sexual abuse.
Betrayal of beliefs. The church overpowering one's life.
Virgo 26
A man who pays respect to the
great paves the way for his own
greatness.
Chinese Proverb
Freedom—to walk free and own
no superior.
WaltWhitman
I don’t know what your destiny
will be,but one thing I know:the
only ones among you who will
be really happy are those who
have sought and found how to
serve.
Albert Schweitzer
Everybody can be great…
because anybody can serve.You
don’t have to have a college
degree to serve.You don’t have
to make your subject and verb
agree to serve.You only need
a heart full of grace.A soul
generated by love.
Dr.Martin Luther King Jr
It is time I stepped aside for a less
experienced and less able man.
Scott Elledge
The surest way to corrupt a
youth is to instruct him to hold
in higher regard those who
think alike than those who think
differently.
Friedrich Nietzche
It is amazing what you can
accomplish if you do not care
who gets the credit.
Harry S.Truman

<<<PAGE 200>>>
VIRGO
I
177
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
ARISTOCRATIC ELDERLY LADIES
DRINKING AFTERNOON TEA IN A
WEALTHY HOME
Commentary: ‘Aristocratic Elderly Ladies Drinking Afternoon
Tea in a Wealthy Home’ is a Symbol of people meeting to share
a drink, something to eat, and a little chatter or gossip. The fact
that they are ‘Aristocratic’ and ‘Elderly’ implies that they have
everything they need, and quite possibly more. It also shows that
they have an air of ‘Wealth’ and grace about them, regardless of
how ‘Wealthy’ they actually are.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, regardless of your actual
financial situation, there’s a need to face things with elegant
composure. This will attract the respect of others. There is no
need to hurry and rush; however being punctual and on time is
probably important. Sharing your time with people who quietly
know and understand each other can bring peace of mind and
the opportunity to relax and take time off. Sometimes, however,
issues that really should be discussed are “masked” and covered
up in an effort to keep things looking respectable. Sharing stories
and gossiping can be rather healthy, as long as things are kept
within the bounds of friendship and decency. Others can feel
excluded, sometimes, particularly younger people and men. They
may feel that they don’t fit in or measure up. Is everybody having
a relaxing ‘Afternoon Tea’, or are they trying to outdo each other
in some measure?
Keywords: Quite knowing atmosphere. Enjoying the company of
others. Special privileges. Taking time off to relax, confident that
all is ok. The elite versus the masses. The appreciation of culture.
Beauty and wealth. Gossip and chatter. Afternoon teas, brunches
and lunches. Charity drives. Being in the group. Exclusivity vs.
open armed acceptance. Ladies at the club. Girls having fun.
Knowing how to entertain. Joy in social communion. Servants.
Fine furnishings. Fine china. Silver cutlery. Candles. Bridge games.
Toasting abundance. Tea, coffee, cake and biscuits. Afternoon
sources. Soirees.
TheCaution: Snobbery and elitism. Always having to go to others
or have them come to you. People expecting others to do all the
work while they just sit around and chat. Mindless talk. Indulgent
behavior. Having little to think about or do. Exclusion of others
as not being worthy. Loneliness. Being rowdy and unkempt.
Uncouth behaviour. "Hitting the bottle".
Virgo 27
There are chapters in every life
which are seldom read and
certainly not aloud.
Carol Shields
To a philosopher all news,as it
is called,is gossip,and they who
edit and read it are old women
over their tea.
Henry DavidThoreau
Where there are friends there is
wealth.
Titus Maccius Plautus
Don’t take up a man’s time
talking about the smartness of
your children;he wants to talk
to you about the smartness of
his children.
Ed Howe
Thank God forTea!What would
the world do without tea? How
did it exist? I am glad I was not
born before tea.
Sydney Smith
I have measured out my life
with coffee spoons.
T.S.Eliot
Frequently the more trifling the
subject,the more animated
and protracted the discussion.
Franklin Pierce
‘Tis the privilege of friendship
to talk nonsense,and have her
nonsense respected.
Charles Lamb

<<<PAGE 201>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
178
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BALDHEADED MAN IN UNIFORM
HAS SEIZED POWER
Commentary: A ‘Baldheaded Man in Uniform Has Seized Power’.
This pictures a situation where male power is dominant. The fact
that this person is pictured as being ‘Baldheaded’ doesn’t literally
have to mean that he is ‘Bald’. Baldness has long been associated
with macho strength and testosterone. The fact that he’s seen
as being ‘In Uniform’ shows that this person has, or needs to be
given, a position of authority or ‘Power’. However, this ‘Uniform’
may give him more of this perceived ‘Power’ than perhaps he
should have or deserves to have.
Oracle: This may be the time to ‘Seize Power’ and to push
forward with decisions that need to be realized and grounded
now. Someone may need to take a stand and direct the course
of action. It is most likely by force of will that the best solution
will be found, but one must be careful to temper the situation, as
strong displays of masculinity could get out of hand very quickly.
Somebody may be pushing their agenda a little too hard, taking
over and showing control issues. There are times when someone
has to take charge—the question is in this situation; are they doing
it wisely and kindly? Is love guiding their decisions or are they
just being pushy and forceful? If someone is being over the top
and bossy, this may be because of feelings of inferiority that they
are trying to mask or cover up, especially if they feel that life has
passed them by. Reigning in the many facets of one’s personality
into a single focus of action can work wonders now.
Keywords: Dominating other’s mental space. Male hormones
running rampant. Issues to do with hair. Ponytails. The story
of Samson and his hair. Taking positions of power. Uniforms.
Demanding others follow one’s lead. Strutting one’s stuff.
“Wearing the pants in the family”. The ability to direct and
organize many people. Letting others express their opinions or
have a say. Domination. The Government. The Military. Decisions
based on logic. Taking action or control.
TheCaution:Pushingtoohardorfast.Rammingone’sconvictions.
Being unkind and bossy. Putting on a show because one’s in
uniform. Power tripping. Being cruel and domineering. Lording
it over others. Being opportunistic. Corruption. Misuse of power.
Bullying. Big business calling the shots. Domestic violence. Taking
charge because one can. Strict rules to live your life by. Taking
over. Not listening to what others have to say.
Virgo 28
All I want is a warm bed and
a kind word,and unlimited
power.
Ashleigh Brilliant
All violence,all that is dreary
and repels,is not power,but the
absence of power.
RalphWaldo Emerson
My fellow Americans.I’ve
signed legislation that will
outlaw Russia forever.We
begin bombing in five minutes.
President Reagan
I have never been able to
conceive how any rational
being could propose happiness
to himself from the exercise of
power over others.
Thomas Jefferson
No person is your friend who
demands your silence,or denies
your right to grow.
AliceWalker
Never get angry.Never make
a threat.Reason with People.
Mario Puzo—from the
Godfather
Never strike your wife,even with
a flower.
Hindu Proverb
Power tends to corrupt,and
absolute power corrupts
absolutely.
Lord Acton

<<<PAGE 202>>>
VIRGO
I
179
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN IS GAINING SECRET
KNOWLEDGE FROM AN ANCIENT
SCROLL HE IS READING
Commentary: ‘A Man is Gaining Secret Knowledge From an
Ancient Scroll He is Reading’. He’s learning insights and things that
will most likely further him in life and his quest for knowledge.
The ‘Ancient Scroll’ obviously contains some very important
information. In order to really gain this ‘Secret Knowledge’, he
needs to pay attention to every detail and not overlook anything.
The clues he is gathering may help him lead a fuller, more spiritual
life, or they may assist him in his hobby or profession.
Oracle: This ‘Ancient Scroll’ that the ‘Man is Gaining Secret
Knowledge’ from can literally refer to written material, but it
can also mean unwritten things, the myths and stories that are
the base elements of our humanity. It is, however, the ability to
translate this ‘Knowledge’ into a practical set of lessons for our
day-to-day life that assists our progress as we grow and mature.
Stories from the past and from mythology are the verbalization
of our inner archetypes. An Oracle is something that reveals
‘Secret knowledge’; our own inner wisdom can be revealed by
the inspiration of an Oracle. The most seemingly insignificant
information can often turn out to be valuable for future
understanding or for our experiences. There may be the feeling
of not knowing what to do, or of not knowing what is going on.
To gain a sense of clarity in your situation, go back to the basic
or essential truths of the matter. This may indeed be the inner
wisdom of the ages. Modern solutions may not be of use at this
time. Understanding will come through patient, steady work and
illuminating inspiration.
Keywords: Learning from ancient mysteries. Looking for answers.
Study and its rewards. Reading between the lines. Finding clues
from the past and applying them to the present. Being privileged
to look into something special. Alchemy. The Bible, the Torah
and the Koran. Manuscripts. Scrolls. Ancient writings. Akashic
records. Classified documents. Secret papers. Scribes.
The Caution: Failing to acknowledge old wisdom or refusing
the new. Losing one’s common sense. Losing touch with reality.
Reading importance into things that are not real or useful.
Conspiracy theories. Religious zealotry. Feeling gifted over the
rest. Finding nothing interesting in the everyday, modern world.
Being single-minded.
Virgo 29
On leaf of palm,on sedge-
wrought roll;on plastic clay and
leathern scroll,man wrote his
thoughts;the ages passed,and
lo!The Press was found at last!
John GreenleafWhittier
History is the unrolled scroll of
prophecy.
James A.Garfield
To furnish the means of
acquiring knowledge is ...the
greatest benefit that can be
conferred upon mankind.It
prolongs life itself and enlarges
the sphere of existence.
John Quincy Adams
All men by nature desire
knowledge.
Aristotle
All human knowledge takes the
form of interpretation.
Walter Benjamin
Through zeal knowledge is
gotten,through lack of zeal
knowledge is lost.
Buddha
Memory is the scribe of the soul.
Aristotle
There is nothing new except that
which has become antiquated.
Lycee Rose Bertin

<<<PAGE 203>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
I
180
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
HAVING AN URGENT TASK TO
COMPLETE,A MAN DOESN’T LOOK
TO ANY DISTRACTIONS
Commentary: ‘Having an Urgent Task to Complete, a Man Doesn’t
Look To Any Distractions’ shows the need for an undisturbed
focus in application and not allowing ‘Distractions’ to interfere.
The person pictured here has got something that needs to be
done and completed, and he doesn’t let anything ‘Distract’ him
from it.
Oracle: There is a need to pay complete attention to the job
at hand as this is necessary now in order to get things done.
Pushing through with the work and avoiding temptations
regardless of what’s going on around you will hasten the rewards
of completion. However, sometimes friends, lovers, partners or
children require our assistance, and we have to drop what we’d
rather be doing. If these intrusions happen time and time again,
we can feel loaded down with responsibilities that aren’t ours,
and can be weighed down by not getting on with what we really
need to achieve. We must remember to put time and effort into
what we want to accomplish, and not allow ourselves to be led
astray. Alternatively, you may be allowing these intrusions as a
way to solve boredom, or as an excuse to procrastinate. If this
describes your situation, ask yourself how much you actually
want what you are trying to do. An exercise to improve clarity
is keeping a goals list. Write down everything you need to do,
no matter how small, in order to realize your objectives. Every
time you tick something off, you are that much closer to getting
them done. On the other hand, one can become bogged down
in the attempt to complete something and actually accomplish
nothing. If this is so, a closer focus on what it is that you really
need to achieve would help.
Keywords: Staying true to yourself and remaining on the path
or on the job. One-pointedness. Meditation. Blocking out the
external world in order to achieve complete focus on a situation or
state of mind. Religious experiences. Maintaining one direction.
Seeing something through to completion. Taking the phone off
the hook. One-eyed behavior.
The Caution: Paying attention to outside influences. Letting the
slightest excuse take one away from what needs to be done.
Rigidity of thought or action leading to missed creative or intuitive
opportunities. Obsession. Indulgences. Workaholics. Addictions
and destructive behavior. Superficial distractions.
Virgo 30
I love deadlines.I especially
like the whooshing sound they
make as they go flying by.
Douglas Adams
While we are postponing,life
speeds by.
Seneca
For all sad words of tongue and
pen,the saddest are those‘it
might have been.
John GreenleafWhittier
It is not enough to be
industrious;so are the ants.
What are you industrious about?
Henry DavidThoreau
The person who says it can’t be
done should not interrupt the
person doing it.
Chinese Proverb
Until you value yourself,you will
not value your time.Until you
value your time,you will not do
anything with it.
M.Scott Peck
There is not any memory
with less satisfaction than the
memory of some temptation we
resisted.
James Branch Cabell
Every man who possibly can
should force himself to a holiday
of a full month in a year,whether
he feels like taking it or not.
William James

<<<PAGE 204>>>
LIBRA
O
181
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BUTTERFLY PRESERVED AND
MADE PERFECT WITH A DART
THROUGH IT
Commentary: ‘A Butterfly Preserved and Made Perfect With a Dart
Through It’ is an image of beauty captured and preserved for it
to be admired and appreciated. People such as Marilyn Monroe,
James Dean, J.F.K., Princess Diana can appear like the ‘Butterfly
that is Preserved and Made Perfect’. They inspire awe and beauty in
us, they represent something we aspire to and long for. No matter
how old they were when they died, their deaths feel somewhat like
a sacrifice; they left us far too soon. However, like the ‘Butterfly’,
they will remain forever beautiful and unchanging in our minds and
culture. Their ‘Butterfly’ is ‘Preserved and Made Perfect’ by being
kept forever in this ‘Perfect’ unchanging state.
Oracle: Beauty in shape or form has been frozen in one moment,
denying the natural processes of decay. An archetypal death is
symbolizedandperhapsatypeof‘Perfection’isenshrinedthrougha
sacrifice. As inspiring as this process can be, it can show difficulties
in shifting or moving on. This Symbol can also picture an event that
is frozen in time, like something that we just can’t forget or let go of.
Feelings of being stuck and immobilized, whether real or imagined,
won’t help at the moment. Perhaps there’s a feeling that you, or
someone else, are being used for something that you don’t agree
with or can’t really benefit from. A movie may be playing in your
mind, over and over, like it’s somehow pinned on a ‘Dart’. Whatever
the situation, is there progress being made or is this a situation of
capture, sacrifice and death? Is something being postponed because
of an inability to move? What sacrifices are being asked? Is sacrifice
really necessary, or is someone being used as a martyr, tied to a
situation or an ideal? Are judgments being made on outer beauty
rather than inner depth? Are issues from the past pinning you down
and stopping you from forward movement?
Keywords: Perfection and beauty made immortal. Holding onto
thingsoreventsfromthepast.Unchangingrealities.Momentsfrozen
in time. Superficiality. External beauty that’s lacking animation.
Pinning things up so they can be admired. The “handiwork” of
creation on display. Transfiguration. Suspension in time. Posters.
TheCaution: Impinging others’ growth for selfish needs. Surrender
and immobilization. Pinned down and unable to move. The attempt
to freeze things from growing naturally. Placing importance on
preserving appearances at the expense of all else. Staying far too
long. Seeing no future. Having no past. Not letting go.
Libra 1
Life is short.Time is fleeting.
Realize the Self.Purity of the
heart is the gateway to God.
Aspire.Renounce.Meditate.
Be good;do good.Be kind;be
compassionate.Inquire,know
Thyself.
Sivananda
The butterfly counts not
months but moments,and has
time enough.
RabindranathTagore
A thing is right when it tends to
preserve the integrity,stability,
and beauty of the biotic
community.It is wrong when it
tends otherwise.
Aldo Leopold
LIFE,n.A spiritual pickle
preserving the body from decay.
We live in daily apprehension
of its loss;yet when lost it is not
missed.
Ambrose Bierce
It is necessary to write,if the
days are not to slip emptily
by.How else,indeed,to clap
the net over the butterfly of
the moment? for the moment
passes,it is forgotten;the mood
is gone;life itself is gone.
Vita Sackville-West
Love is like a butterfly,hold it
too tight,it'll crush,hold it too
loose,it'll fly.
Anon

<<<PAGE 205>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
182
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE LIGHT OF THE SIXTH RACE
TRANSMUTED TO THE SEVENTH
Commentary: The ‘Light of the Sixth Race Transmuted to
the Seventh’. This may be a time of new beginnings—the
implementation of a whole new order. A feeling of ascension is
present here, with people approaching an entirely new level of
living and operating. There’s a need to be with or communicate
with people who have shared visions and hopes for the future.
We have a choice: the fruits of past experience can bring either
light or dark to the present.
Oracle: This Symbol can show a leap ahead in consciousness, so
much so that the old ways of functioning and living are no longer
satisfying, or even possible. Sometimes the old codes for living
are actually somewhat unsustainable or unbearable. It’s best to
respect the value of what is waning and leaving your life, taking
all the best qualities of the past with you. Many things that were
important before have now lost their imperative. The objectives
that one wants to aim for are, or have, changed radically in the
realization of this new age. The aspects of modern society are
often left behind for a higher, more “evolved” state. This Symbol
often shows someone who is within reach of their ultimate
potential. A “new order” needs to be implemented and the time
has come for it to happen. There are likely to be many who share
the same aspirations as you, people who are on the same road and
see the same signs. Join with those who are working at something
truly worthwhile, as this will see you moving further and further
towards a chosen future, rather than one that is just foisted on
you by society. Some may not want to join you in your journey,
though. Regardless of this progression and ascension, there is a
need to remain rooted in the reality of practicality. Otherwise,
you, or someone else, may lose the way in the glamour or “fog”
that these new, sometimes deeply spiritual, realities can bring.
Keywords: Younger or more vital elements taking over from
the elders. The fruits of the new age. Theosophy—Blavatsky’s
theories. Finding kindred spirits. Sharing visions. Ascension and
evolution. Inheritances that move one forward. Growing older
and wiser. UFO’s and aliens. Music that lifts one’s spirits. Gurus
and avatars. Demarcations of evolution. Transmutations. Indigo
children. Evolving.
The Caution: Losing touch with practical survival. Can be racial
(or other) discrimination. Feeling that one is from a “higher” order
(or more evolved) than other people. Leaving others behind.
Libra 2
It is not the strongest of the
species that survive,nor the
most intelligent,but the one
most responsive to change.
Charles Darwin
All that is human must
retrograde if it does not advance.
Edward Gibbon
Postmodernism represents a
moment of suspension before
the batteries are recharged
for the new millennium,
an acknowledgment that
preceding the future is a strange
and hybrid interregnum that
might be called the last gasp of
the past.
Gilbert Adair
A culture is not an abstract thing.
It is a living,evolving process.
The aim is to push beyond
standard—setting and asserting
human rights to make those
standards a living reality for
people everywhere.
Mary Robinson
There is nothing more innately
human than the tendency to
transmute what has become
customary into what has been
divinely ordained.
Suzanne LaFollette
Evolution ever climbing after
some ideal good and reversion
ever dragging evolution in the
mud.
Lord AlfredTennyson

<<<PAGE 206>>>
LIBRA
O
183
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE DAWN OF A NEW DAY REVEALS
EVERYTHING CHANGED
Commentary: ‘The Dawn of a New Day Reveals Everything
Changed’ pictures new beginnings that can be sudden and
unexpected. It’s like a new awakening; something new is taking
shape and form and emerging into a ‘New Day’ and this ‘Reveals
Everything Changed’. What was happening or evident just
recently, even just the ‘Day’ before, has ‘Changed’ through an
event or some shift of the mind or heart. Things are ‘Changed’;
things are ‘New’, they are somehow different.
Oracle: This ‘New Day’ may not have ‘Dawned’ yet, but it is
definitely on its way. It’s hard to believe at first, but eventually it
will ‘Dawn’ on you that many facets of your situation are different
in the light of this ‘New Day’. Life may have been difficult, or
things unsure, and you may feel like you’ve been through a long
night, or a period of darkness. Perhaps someone has been too
comfortable in their habits, or in their complacency, and has let
things just go on and on. There may need to be major changes in
attitude with the new situation or information before you, and
sometimes these changes are hard to adjust to, especially if what’s
happening hasn’t been your idea or your desired outcome. Take
heart, realize that the darkness is abating, and gradually let go
of what went before. Realize that it’s come time to let go of the
old conditions and move on. This is an opportunity to “seize the
day”; to see that there is light all around you. A change of scene
can affect how you feel and how things appear. How does, or how
will, this ‘New Day’ affect you? Only you can know. However,
getting up and seeing the ‘Dawn’ can bring spiritual messages
about the direction you are moving towards. It can infuse you
with hope and energy for the future.
Keywords: New perspectives and realizations. Waking up to
a whole new consciousness or sense of reality. Emerging from
depression. Huge changes that erase things that mattered before.
Radical shifts. Major life experiences. Being reborn. Events out of
nowhere. Changes of fortune. Revitalized perspectives. Coming
out of a sleep.
TheCaution: Holding on despite all evidence and reason to move
on. Refusing to believe that things are getting better. Waking up
and not knowing where one is. Fickleness. Change for the sake
of change. Sticking with the old. Having to adjust continually to
changing circumstances. Unstable behavior.
Libra 3
There is nothing in this world
constant,but inconstancy.
Jonathan Swift
Times change,and we change
with them.
Anon
Things do not change,we
change.
HenryThoreau
To go with the drift of things,To
yield with a grace to reason,To
bow and accept the end Of a
love or of a season.
Robert Frost
One should count each day a
separate life.
Seneca
A day is a miniature eternity.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Finish each day and be done
with it.You have done what
you could;some blunders
and absurdities have crept in;
forget them as soon as you
can.Tomorrow is a new day;
you shall begin it serenely
and with too high a spirit to
be encumbered with your old
nonsense.
RalphWaldo Emerson
This is the highest wisdom
that I own;freedom and life
are earned by those alone who
conquer them each day anew.
JohannWolfgangVon Goethe

<<<PAGE 207>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
184
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GROUP OF YOUNG PEOPLE SIT IN
SPIRITUAL COMMUNION AROUND A
CAMPFIRE
Commentary:A‘GroupofYoungPeopleSitinSpiritualCommunion
Around a Campfire’ symbolizes the need for connecting with others
who have similar feelings and shared beliefs. The ‘Group of Young
People’ are connected not only through their sense of generation;
they ‘Sit in Spiritual Communion’ and are linked through their
interests, beliefs and stories. Something they believe in has drawn
them together and this can bring a sense of ‘Spiritual Communion’
to each of them. They can each have a common focus that opens
them up to creative and receptive responses.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, there is bound to be a central
issue—the ‘Campfire’—that can bring many people, possibly
everyone, together. There may be a feeling of being “out there”, in
the “wilderness”, but remember that you are not alone. Whether
physically, spiritually, mentally or emotionally, others are with you
in some sense. Look to the “center”, the ‘Campfire’ that draws you
together, to see who or what this is. It can be a belief, a religion, or
a reunion of some kind. It can indeed be something as obvious as
a ‘Fire’, or it can be something technological, such as the Internet,
anythingthatbringspeopletogetherin“acircle”,withacentralfocus.
Loneliness and isolation can be overcome with a little concentrated
attention,throughjoiningwithothersinsomekindof‘Communion’.
Lighting a fire, even lighting a candle, can bring joy, pleasure and
a sense of ‘Spiritual Communion’. Rekindling energy can lead to a
deep sense of bonding and understanding. However, there can be
a concern, or fear, that if one’s friends and fellows were to leave the
“campsite” (whatever it is that brought you together), one could feel
lost, alone and abandoned to life and the elements. The ‘Fire’ can
almost become addictive, and lure you away from other things in
yourlife.Thiscanleadtodependencyandsometimescodependency
on others. Be sure to recognize your individuality in the situation,
and claim your power as an independent, but integral, part of the
group.
Keywords: Material concerns left behind. Pioneering with like-
minded others. Sweat lodges. Walks in the woods. Scouts and
Girl Guides. Men’s groups, women’s groups. ESP. Kindred spirits.
Soul mates. Unity. Fellowship. Campfires. Camping. Friends and
companions. Spiritual circles.
The Caution: Being dependent on others. Feeling left out. Having
to fend for one’s self. Being lost in the wilderness. Obsession with
objectives.
Libra 4
In everyone’s life,at some time,
our inner fire goes out.It is
then burst into flame by an
encounter with another human
being.We should all be thankful
for those people who rekindle
the inner spirit.
Albert Schweitzer
After endless days of
commuting on the freeway to
an antiseptic,sealed-window
office,there is a great urge to
backpack in the woods and
build a fire.
Charles Krauthammer
Even in a time of elephantine
vanity and greed,one never has
to look far to see the campfires
of gentle people.
Garrison Keillor
Civilization no longer needs to
open up wilderness;it needs
wilderness to open up the still
largely unexplored human
mind.
David RainsWallace
The hand of God is with the
group.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
Double,double,toil and trouble;
Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
William Shakespeare
An agreeable companion on a
journey is as good as a carriage.
Publilius Syrus

<<<PAGE 208>>>
LIBRA
O
185
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN TEACHING THE TRUE INNER
KNOWLEDGE OF THE NEW WORLD
TO HIS STUDENTS
Commentary: ‘A Man Teaching the True Inner Knowledge of
the New World to His Students’ pictures somebody ‘Teaching’,
instructing or passing on pure ‘Knowledge’, insights and
meaning about ‘The New World’ and the new age they live in.
What he is ‘Teaching’ is somehow very important, valuable and
expansive to ‘His Students’. The more conventional certifications
of ‘Knowledge’, such as diplomas, are not necessarily what’s
important here. It’s the ‘Knowledge’ and awareness that is being
brought through, taught and realized that’s important.
Oracle: Information and understanding is coming to you or
through you. Insight, knowledge and expertise are available or
present, or at least they need to be. True ‘Inner Knowledge’ is
available to all, no matter how “educated” one may be. If everyone
is coming from a true sense of this ‘Inner Knowledge’, there can
be whole ‘New Worlds’ built, with the foundations being passed
down from the ‘Teacher’ to the ‘Students’. Does everyone involved
have the mindset and the “ears” to listen to what’s being taught?
Is the ‘Teacher’ radiating a pure sense of integrity regarding how
he teaches the ways of this ‘New World’? If so, this can picture
a ‘True Teacher’, someone who can lead others on to a brighter
and better future. However, sometimes there can be feelings of
superiority, that someone “knows it all”. Their ideas can be rather
uninspiring, yet they still try to foist them on anyone who’ll
listen. The ‘Students’ who are truly learning are those who will
be the pioneers of the ‘New World’. How are you feeling about
your ‘Teachings’ and your lessons? What needs to be learnt on
an ‘Inner’ level? What can be passed on to others so they might
learn, and improve their lives?
Keywords: Guidance and protection on the path. Being a guiding
light for others. Imparting knowledge. Wisdom. Looking for
truth. Seeking answers to complicated questions. Listening and
learning. Turning to others to receive guidance. Speaking one’s
truth. Instinctual knowledge. Pioneers on the path. Teachers and
students. Secrets of the new age.
The Caution: Dogmatism. Feeling that one person has the only
true answer. Feelings of being highly “evolved” and holding it
over other people’s heads. Arrogance. Evangelism. Telling others
“how it is”, regardless of how they feel. Gurus and cult dogma.
The blind leading the blind.
Libra 5
When the pupil is ready,the
Master appears.
Confucius
I called the NewWorld into
existence to redress the balance
of the Old.
George Canning
We were all on this ship in the
sixties,our generation,a ship
going to discover the NewWorld.
John Lennon
If you know you are on the right
track,if you have this inner
knowledge,then nobody can
turn you off...no matter what
they say.
Barbara McClintock
Learning is finding out what
we already know.Doing is
demonstrating that you know
it.Teaching is reminding others
that they know just as well as
you.You are all learners,doers
and teachers.
Richard Bach
Why does life keep teaching me
lessons I have no desire to learn?
Ashleigh Brilliant
May those whose holy task it is,
To guide impulsive youth,Fail
not to cherish in their souls A
reverence for truth;For teachings
which the lips impart Must have
their source within the heart ...
Charlotte Forten Grimke

<<<PAGE 209>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
186
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN WATCHES HIS IDEALS
TAKING A CONCRETE FORM BEFORE
HIS INNER VISION
Commentary: ‘A Man Watches His Ideals Taking a Concrete Form
Before His Inner Vision’. This person has had the knowledge or
insight to know what he wants, or what he wishes to accomplish,
and it is now materializing in front of him—it is ‘Taking a Concrete
Form Before His Inner Vision’. As the ‘Vision’ unfolds, so do the
things that he’s wanted. He will see, realize and understand
that dreaming of and working on future possibilities often does
indeed, in time, bring them into current realities.
Oracle: This is a good time to visualize your needs, wants,
thoughts and feelings. In the situation facing you, what are the
‘Ideals’ that need to be made real? Something that we’re learning
in this new and exciting age of human progress is that conscious
concrete manifestation is entirely possible, especially when we
feel aligned to our core purpose. When you decide what it is that
you truly want, allowing the energy of it to be focused through
the power of the mind will allow it to manifest. Here, something
new is being formed, even if it is only in its preliminary stage or
early days. If these ‘Ideals’ are really meant to be brought into
'Concrete Form', focusing intently on them will bring them into
reality. By doing this, you will make it possible for your creative
ideas to be projected out into the real world. However, one must
be truly thoughtful about what one wants to create. You may
find that your hopes and dreams are not only brought into the
light of reality, but are truly being put to the test. Be careful what
you wish for. The mind is very powerful, and, if your focus is
not used correctly, difficult situations can emerge. Concentrate
carefully on what it is that you want and 'Watch' what happens.
Think positively as this Symbol can create wonderful magic in
your life.
Keywords: Vivid confrontations with one’s objectives. Creative
visualizations. Imagining things. Meditations and affirmations.
Ideas crystallized. Putting things out into the universe. Making
things happen. Seeing things take shape and form. Clairvoyance.
Film making. Writing and getting published. The power of
manifestation. Solidification. Builders. Sculptures. Dreams.
The Caution: Being dissatisfied with what was thought to be the
true ideal. Feeling that things are “written in stone” and can’t be
changed. Calcified situations or emotions. Neurosis. Focusing on
the negative thereby bringing the negative.
Libra 6
When an idea exclusively
occupies the mind,it is
transformed into an actual
physical or mental state.
Sivananda
The pure impulse of dynamic
creation is formless;and being
formless,the creation it gives
rise to can assume any and
every form.
Kabbalah
The desire accomplished is
sweet to the soul.
The Bible
Determine that the thing can
and shall be done,and then we
shall find the way.
Abraham Lincoln
Plant the seed of desire in your
mind and it forms a nucleus
with power to attract to itself
everything needed for its
fulfillment.
Robert Collier
Speak of the devil and he
appears.
Arabic Proverb
It would not be better if things
happened to men just as they
wish.
Heraclitus
Nature is a revelation of god;art
ia a revelation of man.
HenryWadsworth Longfellow

<<<PAGE 210>>>
LIBRA
O
187
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN FEEDING CHICKENS
AND PROTECTING THEM FROM THE
HAWKS
Commentary: ‘A Woman Feeding Chickens and Protecting Them
From the Hawks’ is an image of maternal care and having a sharp
eye to watch that everyone who needs ‘Protection’ is protected.
The ‘Hawks’ are predators, and ‘Chickens’ can be like sitting-
ducks, to be picked off. The ‘Woman’ is responsible for the well
being of the ‘Chickens’ and has to ensure their safety. With
'Hawks' around, she could find it difficult to relax. There is the
perception that one’s guard can’t be let down without someone,
or some thing, taking advantage.
Oracle: There is a need to look after those in your care, whether
they are people, things or ideas. If you put yourself in the
position of being the caretaker, you must take responsibility
for their care, nurturing and well being, together with other
necessary tasks. The ‘Woman’, who has become the ‘Chickens’
carer, has not only to ‘Feed’ them, but ‘Protect’ them from any
dangers. There are possibly dangers that no one else seems to
be taking seriously.Making sure that safeguards are in place and
working well will ensure that things don’t go wrong. However,
those in a position of care need to recognize the fine line
between protection and overprotection. There is always more
to responsibility than meets the eye. Over-sheltering can lead to
alienation from the carer. A statement often associated with this
is “I only did it to protect you”. This can apply in another sense;
it can indicate keeping people in the dark and not letting them
know what’s really going on—”for their own good”. This Symbol
can show taking responsibility for things that are not normally
yours. Any efforts directed towards protecting and nourishing
will be rewarded in the future.
Keywords: Nurturance, protection and guardianship. Being on
the lookout for changes in the atmosphere. Spotting problems
that nobody else notices. Shielding innocents from “bad-guys”.
Motherhood and the stress of it. Predators. Being firm with
outsiders. Asylum. Places of residence
The Caution: Overprotection. Unable to cope with everyday
problems. Taking over with the pretence of the need for
protection. Not allowing others to grow up. Always being on
the lookout for problems. Neurotic worrying about what may
happen. Seeing the world as a big, scary place. Being picked on.
Taking advantage of the innocent. Protection money. Attacking
others.
Libra 7
I gave my beauty and my youth
to men.I am going to give my
wisdom and experience to
animals.
Brigitte Bardot
You are quite correct in saying
that I banned the export of
monkeys on a humanitarian
basis and not because the
number was lessening.I
believe in preventing cruelty
to all living beings in any form.
Morarji Desai
The best protection any
woman can have ...is courage.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
The raven sees its chicks as
falcons.
Turkish Proverb
I think people are frustrated in
this society,where predators
prey upon normal,law-abiding
citizens,and you never see
justice in the courtroom.In my
films,the predators don’t get
away with it.
Steven Seagal
Woman must not depend upon
the protection of man,but must
be taught to protect herself.
Susan B.Anthony
The mere apprehension of a
coming evil has put many into a
situation of the utmost danger.
Marcus Annaeus Lucan

<<<PAGE 211>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
188
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BLAZING FIREPLACE IN A
DESERTED HOME
Commentary: ‘A Blazing Fireplace in a Deserted Home’ gives an
impression of warmth, security and love. The ‘Blazing Fireplace’
conjures up images of coziness and comfort, and can provide a
feeling of being surrounded by the secure and good things in life.
Even when no one is there to provide the warmth, there can be
feelings of positive energy, containment and safety.
Oracle: Even in times of real loneliness, when you are separated
from everyone or everything, there is a constant, sometimes
unseen, sustaining energy ready to welcome you ‘Home’;
whether it be the ‘Fire’ of your own spiritual center, the warmth
and familiarity of family and kin, or the certainty that one is
sustained by humanity at large. The ‘Home’ may be ‘Deserted’ by
having no parent, or no one living there, someone moving out or
by having no furniture or few of the usual comforts. Everybody
should have a place of refuge and safety and sometimes we have
to be reminded that the warmth of the “flame” is always there
for us, and that we just need to acknowledge it and accept it. A
‘Home’ can be a symbol of love—even when it is left behind or
‘Deserted’ it can remain warm and ready for your return. This
can be the love within family, marriage, or close friends. This
love should never really diminish or lose its warmth. Also, a
‘Home’ can radiate warmth and protection by its very nature.
Something simple like turning on the lights can make a home
warm, comfortable and inviting to others. Placing a candle in
the window or turning on a light in the hall can work wonders,
lifting your spirits and inviting love in.
Keywords: Security and comfort left behind. A fire left blazing
inside to reassure. Wood for burning. Gas, electricity connections.
Holiday homes, or homes that are rarely visited. Homes filled
with love, if not people or possessions. The warmth of the heart.
Holding a candle for someone who’s gone. Fertility issues. Heart
and hearth. Fireplaces. The place to which one returns.
The Caution: A sense of isolation, separation, abandonment, and
bitterness. Sabotage by, or of, loved ones and family. Being forced
out of the home, possibly for social reasons. Desertion and decay
of love. Never being at home because of work concerns and
commitments. Separation. Divorce. Latch-key children. Feeling
alone and out in the cold. The light being on, but no one at home.
Lack of domestic supplies.
Libra 8
Home is where there’s one to
love us.
Charles Swain
East,west,home’s best.
Traditional Proverb
… And the still deeper secret
of the secret:The land that
is nowhere,that is the true
home…
Chang Po-tuan
Since the house is on fire let us
warm ourselves.
Italian Proverb
One may have a blazing hearth
in one’s soul and yet no one
ever come to sit by it.Passersby
see only a wisp of smoke from
the chimney and continue on
the way.
VincentVan Gogh
When I can no longer bear to
think of the victims of broken
homes,I begin to think of the
victims of intact ones.
Peter DeVries
Figure it out.Work a lifetime to
pay off a house.You finally own
it and there’s no one to live in it.
Arthur Miller
Men resemble great deserted
palaces:the owner occupies
only a few rooms and has
closed-off wings where he never
ventures.
Francois Mauriac

<<<PAGE 212>>>
LIBRA
O
189
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THREE OLD MASTERS HANGING
IN A SPECIAL ROOM IN AN ART
GALLERY— SOMETIMES THEY SEEM
TO SPEAK TO EACH OTHER
Commentary: ‘Three Old Masters’ are ‘Hanging in a Special Room
in an Art Gallery’. Being ‘Masters’, they are very valuable, especially
as they are ‘In a Special Room’. The paintings are timeless, and can
be so lifelike that ‘Sometimes They Seem to Speak to Each Other’.
Time often doesn’t seem to exist in this realm. ‘Rooms’ that are
empty, except for art works on the walls, can feel like something
is going on at another level. Even when there’s nobody actually
there, it can seem as though conversations are being held. The
eyes of the paintings can appear to be watching what goes on
around them. It can even feel like the eyes actually follow you
around the room.
Oracle: Communication here is at a completely different level
than is normally experienced. It can be unspoken, and include
subtle messages that are enduring and valuable. Going deeply
into understanding truths about art, our cultural inheritance and
its significance can bring about realizations and revelations that
expand one’s mind and life. This Symbol can picture speaking to
others about abstract concepts on a higher level. Everyday chatter
that doesn’t go deep or explore life’s beauties can become mindless
and mundane. Go deeper into your situation. Find solutions as
different parts of your personality and psyche give you clues or
tell you what you should be doing or where you should be. Focus
during quiet times, times of introspection when people aren’t
around to distract. The solution may rest in balancing the three
agencies: spiritual, physical and mental.
Keywords: Truth in the image. Intuitive vision. Reverence for
art, form and tradition. Images bringing messages. Art collections
and collecting art. Photographs. Capturing life in a work of art.
Furniture of a period. The art of placement. Beautiful images.
Wisdom speaking. Crowded galleries or empty rooms. Images
that speak volumes. The Sabian Symbols as images. Minds that
don’t shut down. Animations.
The Caution: Undue reliance on conservative values. Too much
importance placed on appearance instead of substance. Snobbery
causedbyelevatedfeelingsofimportance.Art’srarefiedatmosphere
that excludes others as unworthy or uneducated. Serious faces.
Libra 9
One picture is worth a
thousand words.
Proverb
Nature is a revelation of God;
Art a revelation of man.
HenryWadsworth Longfellow
Art is the lie that makes us
realize the truth.
Pablo Picasso
Fine art is that in which the
hand,the head,and the heart of
man go together.
John Ruskin
Art is unquestionably one of the
purest and highest elements in
human happiness.It trains the
mind through the eye,and the
eye through the mind.As the
sun colors flowers,so does art
color life.
John Lubbock
Art has no enemy but ignorance.
Romanian Proverb
A painting in a museum
probably hears more foolish
remarks than anything else in
the world.
Edmond Jules Goncour
Thecreativeactisnotperformed
bytheartistalone;thespectator
bringstheworkincontactwith
theexternalworldbydeciphering
andinterpretingitsinner
qualificationsandthusaddshis
contributiontothecreativeact.
Marcel Duchamp

<<<PAGE 213>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
190
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CANOE IS APPROACHING SAFETY
THROUGH DANGEROUS WATERS
Commentary: ‘A Canoe is Approaching Safety’ implies a time
of calm and reassurance ahead. It is coming to ‘Safety Through
Dangerous Waters’. The way ahead is showing itself and there is
an assurance that one is reaching their destination after a difficult
or even life-threatening time. The person in the ‘Canoe’ has
probably been through a hair-raising or rough experience, having
to shoot the rapids and having to be very adaptable to changing
conditions.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, your ‘Canoe is Approaching
Safety’, however, it is not quite there yet, and it may be that the
hard times are not completely through. You are, most likely, not
quite where you’d like to be. You may be experiencing ‘Dangerous
Waters’, but there is a guarantee of safety and “smooth sailing” in
the near future. Things are moving into a new state of equilibrium.
Although there is relief in sight, be sure not to switch off your
attentiontothedifficultiesordangersthatyouarestillexperiencing.
The last battles can be the ones that beat you. Even if you are the
type who thrives on the thrill of danger, it’s important to respect
the times of calm to reflect on the lessons that have come from
the recent dangers or difficulties. The difficulties in your situation
are likely to have been quite arduous, and yet valuable in terms of
your resistance against difficult times to come. Neglecting to take
advantage of the placid waters (the ‘Safety’ that is promised) is a
waste of a valuable opportunity and may lead to being unprepared
if the ‘Dangerous Waters’ come again. The coming calm is an
opportunity to review what has passed, and prepare for whatever
is yet to come. Before long you’ll realize that you’ve come through
difficult straits and the worst of it is over.
Keywords: The calm after the storm. Navigating difficult straits and
coming out okay. White water rafting. Skydiving and other risky
activities. Rough waters vs. plain sailing. Recovery. Remission. Light
at the end of the tunnel. Personal initiations. Trials of test and defeat.
Being stoic. Retaining dignity and graciousness. Exercising care
and restraint. Avoiding over exaggerated enthusiasm. Deliverance
on many levels. Salvation. Staying on track.
The Caution: Neglecting to take a time to rest. Taking foolhardy
risks, believing that all will be okay. Pre-empting situations without
completing things in the present. Thinking that “lightning never
strikes in the same place twice”. Shooting more rapids. Freezing
up and not moving.
Libra 10
God promises a safe landing
but not a calm passage.
Bulgarian Proverb
The winds and waves are
always on the side of the ablest
navigators.
Edward Gibbon
Isaidhere’stheriverIwanttoflow
on,here’sthedirectionIwantto
go,andputmyboatin.Iwasready
fortherivertotakeunexpected
turnsandpresentobstacles.
NancyWoodhull
The man who is swimming
against the stream knows the
strength of it.
WoodrowWilson
In this world there is always
danger for those who are afraid
of it.
George Bernard Shaw
Do the thing you fear most
and the death of fear is certain.
MarkTwain
Iamdrivenintoadesperatestrait
andcannotsteeramiddlecourse.
Philip Massinger
Call on God,but row away from
the rocks.
Indian Proverb
Ican’tchangethedirectionofthe
wind,butIcanadjustmysailsto
alwaysreachmydestination.
Jimmy Dean

<<<PAGE 214>>>
LIBRA
O
191
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PROFESSOR PEERING OVER HIS
GLASSES AT HIS STUDENTS
Commentary: A ‘Professor’ is ‘Peering Over His Glasses at His
Students’. His eyes have been strained over the years from doing
close-up work with books and papers and now he needs ‘Glasses’
for reading and studying. The rational mind requires a different
kind of “lens” to that of the emotion or intuition. When the
'Professor' moves his gaze or attention to ‘His Students’, he needs
to use a different focus. He ‘Peers Over His Glasses’ to look at them
and to see them as they truly are. If he observes them through the
same intellectual “lenses” he uses for his study, he may neglect to
see them as individuals with their own abilities and needs, and
their human attributes will get lost in the process.
Oracle: You may need to interrupt your rational, linear, skeptical
concentration to realize that people, together with your intuitive
ideas, are all around you, and they are valuable assets of your life and
development. Are you, or is someone else, really looking at things
with the right ‘Glasses’? Do you have “old eyes” or “new eyes” to
see? Is there a projection of something, a thought or an attitude,
onto others in this situation that isn’t really appropriate or doesn’t
really belong to them? Someone is, or needs to, notice what’s going
on, or take a minute to observe people in their true light. There may
be a need to remember that being “clever” or “intellectual” does
not mean that someone is better or above everyone else. Although,
of course, being in a position of some kind of authority can lend
weight when there’s a need for giving kindly advice. There may
be an issue of telling people what to do and how they should act.
Are you the ‘Professor’ or are you a ‘Student’? Regardless of which
one you are, keeping in mind that people are to be viewed kindly,
seriously, and with respect, will help.
Keywords: Lenses of perception. Seeing that others get the
message. Intellectual snobbery. Photography. Lenses as shields or
barriers between people or things. Observing others. Examining
one’s self. Understanding where you’re looking. Giving advice.
Teachers. Professors. The ability to “read others”. Motivations or
talents of others seen and appreciated.
TheCaution: Assuming a superior position. Thinking others have a
lesser position or intelligence. Reading endless self-help books and
not noticing real life. Bossing others. Not seeing, or caring to notice,
one’s own faults and limitations. Feeling separate from what’s
being said or taught. Distortions of perception or observation.
Condescending behavior. Seeing people as interruptions.
Libra 11
We must look at the lens
through which we see the
world,as well as the world
we see,and understand that
the lens itself shapes how we
interpret the world.
Stephen Covey
The mind is for seeing,the heart
is for hearing.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
Every closed eye is not sleeping,
and every open eye is not
seeing.
Anon
Question and answer is not a
civilized form of conversation.
Patrick O’Brian
A cynic is a man who looks at
the world with a monocle in his
mind’s eye.
CarolynWells
The task of the educator lies in
seeing that the child does not
confound good with immobility
and evil with activity.
Maria Montessori
I had some eyeglasses.I was
walking down the street when
suddenly the prescription ran
out.
StephenWright
A suppressed resolve will betray
itself in the eyes.
George Eliot

<<<PAGE 215>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
192
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
MINERS ARE EMERGING FROM A
DEEP COAL MINE
Commentary: ‘Miners Are Emerging From a Deep Coal Mine’.
They’ve been working hard, and now the siren has sounded and
their shift is finished. Coming back to the surface, they can take a
deep breath and feel themselves infused with fresh energy. Even
if the Sun is going down at the end of the day, it and fresh air can
bring a new awareness and wonder at being alive. The ‘Miners’ are
free for now and finished with the day’s work.
Oracle: It may feel as though you’ve been operating in the dark,
or in some kind of underworld. When we’ve been submerged in
work, deep issues or spaces for a long time, we often end up feeling
suppressed and worn-out. Thoughts and emotions can be clouded
with doubt and fear making them difficult to plumb or discover.
You may even feel like you have been in some kind of hell; perhaps
you’ve had to go into the depths in the search for something. A
feelingofbreathlessnesscaneruptfromnotbeingabletounderstand
what’s happening. Take a deep breath and learn to relax! Delving
deeply can bring messages from the subconscious that reveal some
surprising things. However, it is often not enough to merely find the
message; there’s also a need to bring any realizations into the clear
light of day so that you, and others, can benefit from this passage and
learn to breathe more freely. Imagine coming back to the surface,
taking a deep breath and feeling yourself infused with the energy
of fresh air and sunshine. Look carefully at situations, for it may
take time for your eyes to adjust to the new light. Even if you need
to go back within, into the ‘Deep Coal Mine’ in the near future,
having faith and the acceptance of being able to operate and see in
“the dark” will assist you with any problems you may encounter. If
you are ‘Emerging’ with others, this can lead to a ‘Deep’ sense of
camaraderie, as people realize that they’ve been through the same
straights and have come out okay.
Keywords: Release from arduous labor. Stopping work. Coming
into the light. Deep subconscious healing. Hypnotherapy. Going
into dark places. Claustrophobia. Memories from the past or out of
nowhere. Things dark and “gothic”. Lung and breathing problems.
Persephoneemerging.Thelabyrinthofthemind.Themindflooding.
Tunnel vision. Caves. Mines. Digging for answers. Relief and time
off. Ghost stories. Being the "canary" in the mine. Work.
The Caution: Gloomy outlooks. Not seeing potentials. Emerging
with a “blackened face”. Difficulty breathing. Earning a living being
alife and deathsituation. Workinghardforsmallrewards.Emotional
loops. Things hard to escape. Fear of confinement or capture.
Libra 12
The depth of darkness to which
you can descend and still live is
an exact measure of the height
to which you can aspire to reach.
LaurensVan der Post
To me every hour of light and
dark is a miracle.Every cubic
inch of space is a miracle.
WaltWhitman
For many children,joy comes as
the result of mining something
unique and wondrous about
themselves from some inner
shaft.
Thomas J.Cottle
Underground issues from
one relationship or context
invariably fuel our fires in
another.
Harriet Lerner
In isolation I ruthlessly plow
the deep silences,seeking my
opportunities like a miner
seeking veins of treasures.In
what shallow glimmering space
shall I find what glimmering
glory?
Jamaica Kincaid
Beauty is also to be found in a
day’s work.
Mamie Sypert Burns
Free men freely work:whoever
fears god,fears to sit at ease.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning

<<<PAGE 216>>>
LIBRA
O
193
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CHILDREN BLOWING SOAP BUBBLES
Commentary: ‘Children Blowing Soap Bubbles’ is a wonderful
image of playfulness and fun. The ‘Children’ are having fun
‘Blowing Soap Bubbles’, they love to watch how big they can
make them, how long they can last and how high they can go.
The swirling colors of the ‘Soap’ along with the fact that they can
pop at any moment add to the fun and the fascination.
Oracle: It is through fantasy, simplicity and imagination that you
will find the best solution. Saying things for the sake of saying
them, doing things for the sake of doing them, or doing things
with no real thought of the outcome is fun, and perhaps what’s
needed to lighten things up—as long as nobody is offended, led
astray or hurt in the process. This is not a time to be too deep
and meaningful, for it will be in fleeting moments of pleasurable
wonder that you will find the answer to what’s needed. However,
this can also show someone not being “real”, not taking things
seriously and not wanting to take the responsibility for any
outcomes. Perhaps there’s a feeling that the things that are being
said aren’t substantial—more like mere cartoon captions. Fantasy
can intrude on reality and what’s being said can sometimes be
forgotten in a minute. It’s almost like these issues didn’t ever
exist. Sometimes, however, something said in a fleeting moment, a
mere throwaway line, can have a positive or permanent effect on
others. Whilst there is likely to be fun and joy, there may need to
be consideration of whether it will produce anything substantial,
permanent or real. If this situation is one of short-term rewards
and enjoyment, it may be wonderful, but relying on anything long
lasting may be unrealistic and disappointing. Whatever, enjoy the
moment and the display of fun while it lasts.
Keywords: Spending time being creative with children. Drama.
Being carefree or superficial. Finding joy in pure abstractions.
Captions in cartoons. Pollyanna attitudes that can lead to fun
or nowhere. Not caring about the future, only the moment.
Rediscovering the simple joys of life. Toys and playing. Soap and
bubbles. Comic book heroes. Being easily amused. Fun. Playing
with friends.
The Caution: Never growing up. Frivolousness. Daydreaming.
Resenting people who don’t have serious work. Upset over the
loss of things that don’t have lasting substance. Not meaning
what’s said. Making light of the serious. Moving on without
completing anything of lasting value. Dislike of chitchat.
Gullibility. Impractical behavior. Not knowing when to stop
talking.
Libra 13
Man is most nearly himself
when he achieves the
seriousness of a child at play.
Heraclitus
It’s fun being a kid.
Arthur Angier
But childhood prolonged,
cannot remain a fairyland.It
becomes a hell.
Louise Bogan
One of the most obvious facts
about grownups to a child is
that they have forgotten what
it is like to be a child.
Randall Jarrell
Every child is an artist.The
problem is to remain an artist
once he grows up.
Pablo Picasso
Always tell the truth.That way,
you don’t have to remember
what you said.
MarkTwain
Where there is joy there is
creation.Where there is no joy
there is no creation:know the
nature of joy.
Upanishads
It isn’t the great big pleasures
that count the most;it’s making
a great deal out of the little
ones.
JeanWebster

<<<PAGE 217>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
194
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN THE HEAT OF THE NOON,A MAN
TAKES A SIESTA
Commentary: ‘In the Heat of the Noon, a Man Takes a Siesta’
points to the need to take some time off, even when one is in
the middle of accomplishing some task or doing work. The ‘Man’
knows that if he takes an hour or two off during the middle of
the day, taking ‘A Siesta’, when he gets back to work he will have
a clearer mind and more strength to get through what needs to
be done.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, relaxing and recuperating
will serve to give you greater reserves of strength to complete
the tasks at hand. Sometimes we just have to stop and refresh
our batteries – this is probably just such a time. Also, it’s good
to guard against working one’s self into a lather and getting
exhausted. This can have long term effects and mistakes are
easily made through tiredness, stress or boredom with the job
or chore. A nap, a change of atmosphere or taking some time
out can lead to new solutions about work and how to get things
done. By the same token, you may need to ignore judgments from
others who think that they know what you should be doing, how
often and when. On the other hand, this Symbol can point to
somebody taking time off when they should actually be getting
things completed. A ‘Siesta’ should not translate into neglecting
your duties—if something needs completing, a ‘Siesta’ may not
be appropriate or possible. Take a break and think about the
situation, as long as it is appropriate. When you get back on the
job your renewed energy will help you get through everything.
You may find the solution you’ve been searching so hard for just
pops into your mind.
Keywords: Meditation. The need to take time out. Sleep apnea and
other sleep disorders. Midday rushes. Recuperating or laziness.
Hammocks. Long lunch hours. Rejuvenation. Knowing when to
call a halt. Taking breaks. Looking after one’s health. Tiredness
and yawning. Hot and demanding days leading to inertia or
exhaustion. Dreams and fantasies.
The Caution: Wasting time. Being disinterested in things. Losing
energy or interest when one should be at the peak of activity or
achievement. Refusing to take a break. Going past the bounds of
what should be done. Working so hard that one is forced to stop
through exhaustion or ill-health. Always being on the go while
others sit back and enjoy. Losing one's grip on reality. Unwinding
after toil or trouble. Withdrawal.
Libra 14
Oneshouldrestwhenitistimeto
restandactwhenitistimetoact.
Anon
Did you sleep well? No,I made a
couple of mistakes.
StevenWright
Wasting time is an important
part of living.
Anon
Sometimes the most urgent and
vital thing you can possibly do is
take a complete rest.
Ashleigh Brilliant
Take a rest;a field that has rested
gives a beautiful crop.
Ovid
In Japan,employees
occasionally work themselves to
death.It’s called Karoshi.I don’t
want that to happen to anybody
in my department.The trick is
to take a break as soon as you
see a bright light and hear dead
relatives beckon.
Scott Adams
I like work:it fascinates me.I
can sit and look at it for hours.I
love to keep it by me:the idea of
getting rid of it nearly breaks my
heart.
Jerome K.Jerome
Follow effective action with
quiet reflection.From the quiet
reflection will come even more
effective action.
James Levin

<<<PAGE 218>>>
LIBRA
O
195
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CIRCULAR PATHS
Commentary: ‘Circular Paths’ symbolize a situation where there
is a continual coming round back to the same place. It can picture
a pattern of going round and round, with no real outcome and no
sense of a final destination. In some instances, this can be good,
as it can be rather meditative but it can also prove to be a very
real waste of time.
Oracle: You may feel as though you are back where you started,
like you’ve been through this whole thing before. However, it’s
best to consolidate, remember and appreciate the experience and
learn what you have gained on your way to where you are now.
When you are returning to what appears to be where you started,
you always have some level of new experience and new skills.
Sometimes life seems to be a continuously repetitive journey
and there can be the need to break the chains that bind you. It
can feel like a karmic wheel. This theme of ‘Circular Paths’ may
be experienced in school, at work or at home where routines
can become boring, repetitive and never-ending. Indeed, it can
feel like there’s no possibility of escape. But every experience
is an opportunity and every opportunity is an experience—no
matter how many times it has been done before. That is, unless
you’re really losing ground or time is slipping away to complete
something. Procrastination can be like treading water or being
stuck on these ‘Circular Paths’. Do you keep telling yourself
that you’re going to stop one day? Take heart and realize that
everything is always in motion and there’s the possibility of
stepping off this treadmill when the time is right. If you take the
trouble to look at the real details of your experience rather than
just experiencing dull repetition, something new and inspiring
can always be found.
Keywords: Going round and round. The orbits of the planets.
Cosmic rhythms and cycles. The cycles of life. Things we feel we
can trust. The secure path that never really leads anywhere. Crop
circles. Realizing mistakes and learning from them. The wheels
of progress. Merry-go-rounds. Circular machinery. Mazes and
labyrinths. Chaos theory. Learning through repetition. Looking
for somewhere to park.
The Caution: Being lost in abstractions or small details. Losing
perspective from going round and round. Addictive cycles that
are hard to get rid of. Boredom. Episodes that repeat themselves.
Repeating the same actions or mistakes. Treadmills. Habits that
are self-defeating.
Libra 15
History is simply one damned
thing after another.
Winston Churchill
The air is full of our cries.But
habit is a great deadener.
Samuel Beckett
Dangers bring fears,and fears
more dangers bring.
Richard Baxter
We are what we repeatedly do.
Excellence,then,is not an act,
but a habit.
Aristotle
Search for meaning,eat,
sleep.Search for meaning,eat,
sleep.Die,search for meaning,
search for meaning,search for
meaning.
Doug Horton
When in danger or in doubt,
run in circles,scream and shout.
Bumper Sticker
The great thing in the world is
not so much where we stand,
as in what direction we are
moving.
OliverWendell Holmes
As people are walking all the
time,in the same spot,a path
appears.
Lu Xun
Men have become the tools of
their tools.
Henry DavidThoreau

<<<PAGE 219>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
196
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AFTER THE STORMS OF WINTER,A
BOAT LANDING STANDS IN NEED OF
RECONSTRUCTION
Commentary: ‘After the Storms of Winter, a Boat Landing Stands in
Need of Reconstruction’. A ‘Storm’ has swept through and damaged,
or ruined, some usually secure part of life. The ‘Boats’ cannot
dock at the ‘Boat Landing’ if it is destroyed or shaky or insecure.
Situations, possessions and people may be compromised, or even
ruined. Our foundations can be rocked almost to the point of
complete destruction. Now there’s the need for ‘Reconstruction’.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, there needs to be a plan put
into action to get things repaired so that life can move on. Even
situations built on solid foundations can quickly be swept away
by the tidal forces of emotion or life’s circumstances. ‘After the
Storms of Winter’ implies that there is a need to take stock of
what’s happened. Rebuilding and restructuring is timely and
probably very necessary. When there is “nowhere to dock” your
life or emotions, it can take time to recover your feet and get things
back under control. You may have to ‘Reconstruct’ some usually
secure part of your life, but in the future you’ll be wiser and you’ll
build something stronger. Rebuilding some area of your life will
require patience, commitment, faith and a sense of security and
purpose. Sometimes, through facing devastation, we can truly
come to grips with our own power. Without positive attitudes,
and a reinforced attitude, the ‘Reconstruction’ may, at best, be
shaky or temporary. You may ask whether ‘The Storms of Winter’
have really finished and warmer conditions can be expected or
trusted. Picking yourself up and rebuilding after some harrowing
or dangerous collision with reality can lead to a better, stronger
and safer sense of where you can feel safe and harbored.
Keywords: Temporary loss. Emotional repair. Tools to repair
damage and build a new life. Having faith that the worst is over
and recovery can begin. Calling in the experts. Taking time to
put the pieces back together. Working to ensure the safety of the
community. Insurance claims. The fragility of man’s world in the
face of nature. Returning to work.
The Caution: Making excuses instead of fixing things. Feeling
emotionally swamped and powerless. Being torn apart. Leaving
things a mess. Feeling shot to pieces. Letting things wear down
to the point of collapse. Having nowhere to dock. Arguments and
violence.
Libra 16
Character builds slowly,but
it can be torn down with
incredible swiftness.
Faith Baldwin
Each man’s task is his life
preserver.
George B.Emerson
It takes a real storm in the
average person’s life to make
him realize how much worrying
he has done over the squalls.
Heartland Advisor
AlotofpeopleaskmeifIwere
shipwrecked,andcouldonly
haveonebook,whatwoulditbe?
Ialwayssay‘HowtoBuildaBoat’.
StevenWright
What is the appropriate
behavior for a man or a woman
in the midst of this world,
where each person is clinging
to his piece of debris?What’s
the proper salutation between
people as they pass each other
in this flood?
Leonard Cohen
I inhabit a weak,frail,decayed
tenement battered by the winds
and broken in on by the storms,
and,from all I can learn,the
landlord does not intend to
repair.
John Quincy Adams
Be an optimist—at least until
they start moving animals in
pairs to Cape Kennedy.
Anon

<<<PAGE 220>>>
LIBRA
O
197
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A RETIRED SEA CAPTAIN WATCHES
SHIPS ENTERING AND LEAVING THE
HARBOR
Commentary: ‘A Retired Sea Captain Watches Ships Entering and
Leaving the Harbor’ pictures an image of calmness, quiet and an
inner knowledge that’s come from years and years of going “out
to sea”. The ‘Sea Captain’ has taken on the elements again and
again and has survived some very dangerous situations. As he is
now ‘Retired’, it is a time for the type of quiet recollection and
reflection that is usually only afforded to someone who has “been
there, done that”. His part for now is to observe life and its trials
rather than participating directly in them.
Oracle: You may feel that the stormy, unpredictable emotional life
is something you can leave behind. In your situation, like the ‘Sea
Captain’, however, there will always be frustration experienced
in the desire to return to the arena where the action is. Right
now an objective and calm understanding of life’s experiences
is the true goal, along with rest, relaxation and nourishing the
body and spirit. However, there’s a need to be wary of merely
looking out at the world from a confined perspective and feeling
like you’ve got no choice but to sit, observe and reflect. It is quite
possible that there are still a lot of new experiences out there
for you. This may be about some measure of “retirement”, but it
is certainly not likely to be the end of life. This time could be an
interim period, with time spent contemplating your next move.
Reflecting on the past shouldn’t dominate your possibilities,
opportunities or desires for new experiences. Rather, this is a
time to sit and contemplate and to make plans for what is yet to
come. A whole new arena of activity is quite likely to open up
after a period of recharging your batteries.
Keywords: Memories and peaceful contemplation. Disconnection
from the past. Concentrating on more immediate circumstances.
Fatigue and the need for rest. Being a spectator rather than a
participant. Being part of an audience. Voyeurism. Turning to
domestic pursuits. Writing one’s memoirs. Nostalgia. Safe ports
or harbors. Retiring from public life.
The Caution: A cop-out, escaping from reality. Relying on past
experiences. A need to defend one’s shoreline. Losing faith
in life. Staring at lost opportunities and times gone by. Not
wanting to contributing any more. Losing interest in the struggle.
Disillusionment. Frustration. Boredom.
Libra 17
Too often man handles life as
he does the bad weather;He
whiles away the time as he
waits for it to stop.
Alfred Polgar
Be not simply good;be good for
something.
Henry DavidThoreau
I must go down to the seas
again,to the lonely sea and the
sky.And all I want is a tall ship,
And a star to steer her by.
John Masefield
Ashipintheharborissafe,but
thatisnotwhatshipsarebuiltfor.
Proverb
Thereisnopleasureinhaving
nothingtodo.Thefunisinhaving
lotstodoandnotdoingit.
Mary Little
Give wind and tide a chance to
change.
Richard E.Byrd
The stately ship is seen no more,
The fragile skiff attains the shore;
And while the great and wise
decay,And all their trophies pass
away,Some sudden thought,
some careless rhyme,Still floats
above the wrecks ofTime.
William Edward Hartpole
Lecky
What is this life if,full of care,we
have no time to stand and stare?
William Henry James

<<<PAGE 221>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
198
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWOMENPLACEDUNDERARREST
GIVEANACCOUNTINGFORTHEIRACTS
BEFORETHETRIBUNALOFSOCIETY
Commentary:‘TwoMen’are‘PlacedUnderArrest’.Theyhaveto‘Give
anAccountingForTheirActsBeforetheTribunalofSociety’.Theyare
standingbeforesomerepresentativeorauthorityandspeakingabout
how they have acted against the rules and codes of ‘Society’. The fact
thattheyare‘PlacedUnderArrest’doesn’thavetomeanthattheyare
literally taken away by the police. It can be that they are held back by
circumstances, people or experiences and they feel stuck, unable to
move or stripped of their freedom. This can be rather compromising
to one’s integrity, ideals and strength of character.
Oracle: People’s ideas or actions may be under criticism or
examination, to the point of feeling that someone has offended
social responsibility and acceptability. They may have to justify or
explain themselves, and relationships can be held in limbo until all
the facts come to light. There may be a need to be thoughtful about
the situation, because there may be nothing but suspicion at this
point. The “case” could well be dismissed, with people forgiven
or let off the hook, but with suspicion in the air, what permanent
damage has already been done? Often a sense of trust and belief in
the goodness of people is necessary. An attitude of forgiveness may
be really important to move through this situation with one’s sense
ofprideintact.Beingchargedwithanoffensecandrivepeopleapart,
with each trying to save their own neck. How long can someone
be “handcuffed”, either to themselves or to another? Imagining the
removal of “the cuffs” could lead to a turn around in the situation.
People in positions of power, physical or emotional, should show
mercy so others can also forgive and forget and get on with their
lives. Ultimately, the goal must lead to freedom.
Keywords: Having to plead one’s case. The need for “legal help”.
Unacceptable principles. Blowing the whistle. Pointing at others
to get off charges. People unable to relate. The “Romeo and Juliet”
story. Feeling caught out. Restrictions. Karma to be worked out.
Being framed. Circumstances out of control. People in handcuffs.
Identification parades. Police. The law. Lawyers. Judges. Juries.
Tribunals. Police states. Breaking laws.
The Caution: Refusing to conform. Sabotage of relationship values.
Feeling stuck, unable to move. Staying in relationships when one
shouldgo.Deadeningemotions.Shuttingofftocope.Nothavingone’s
point of view heard. Losing one’s authority. Being bound karmically.
Being tied up and limited.
Libra 18
To accuse others for one’s
misfortunes is a sign of want
of education.To accuse oneself
shows that one’s education
has begun.To accuse neither
oneself nor others shows one’s
education is complete.
Epictetus
Manypromisingreconciliations
havebrokendownbecause,while
bothpartiescameprepared
toforgive,neitherpartycame
preparedtobeforgiven.
CharlesWilliams
Mostofuscanforgiveandforget;
wejustdon’twanttheother
persontoforgetthatweforgave.
Ivern Ball
We have only one person to
blame,and that’s each other.
Barry Beck—NewYork Ranger,
on who started a brawl
No! No! Sentence first—verdict
afterwards.
Lewis Carroll
Crime expands according to
our willingness to put up with it.
Barry Farber
Little thieves are hanged,but
great ones escape.
Proverb
I haven’t committed a crime.
What I did was fail to comply
with the law.
David Dinkins—Former New
York City Mayor

<<<PAGE 222>>>
LIBRA
O
199
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GANG OF ROBBERS IN HIDING
Commentary: A ‘Gang of Robbers in Hiding’ is an image of
people, possibly hidden in the shadows, waiting to take advantage
of someone or something. The ‘Robbers’ are watching and waiting
for the appropriate time to come out into the light of day, or it
just might feel as though they are.
Oracle: In your situation, you may feel that you have been
wronged or something has been taken from you. At the moment,
however, because the ‘Robbers are In Hiding’ there is probably
little or no way of finding out who or what is the cause. Check if
you are exposing yourself to being taken advantage of or attacked
in some way. Be careful not to get confused between reality
and paranoia. You could spend your time searching for the real
perpetrators, however a better solution may be to get on with
your life, whilst being mindful that something could go awry.
Perhaps an “authority” of some kind needs to come into play, to
sort things through, to ensure future safety and get life back on
track. This person can be an external party who’s in charge and
powerful in some way, or it can be your own sense of authority
that needs to sort out the facts of what’s really going on. Whatever
happens in this situation, things will most probably come to light
at a later time. This Symbol can point to delusions of someone’s
thought processes. Make sure that there is no undermining of
faith in others by indulging in suspicions that are ungrounded in
reality. Locking out life can lead to feelings of being a prisoner
or result in alienation from others. Sometimes one has to “break
a window” to allow the light to get in. The solution may lie in
taking control of your emotional, mental and physical realities.
If you merely react in a vulnerable and defenseless way, what is
there to deter the ‘Robbers’ from taking advantage of you?
Keywords: Gaining unfair advantage. Robbers and thieves.
Spying. The cold war. Big business ripping off the “little guy”.
People appearing to be something that they are not. Con-men
mentality. Holding up proceedings. Mental attitudes that sabotage,
restrict or control. The need for light. Voyeurism. Gangs. Private
detectives. Ambushes.
The Caution: Gaining unfair advantage at someone else’s
expense. Finding it hard to trust anything. Difficult hidden energy
that may erupt into consciousness. Feeling that someone is going
to “get” you. Hiding in the shadows. Locks and shutters that
prevent true relationship. Unbalanced mental states. Paranoia.
Distrusting life.
Libra 19
The robbed that smiles steals
something from the thief.
William Shakespeare
In this world there is always
danger for those who are afraid
of it.
George Bernard Shaw
You admit it!—I admit I’m
being persecuted.—Yeah? By
whom?—By them!—But,who
specifically is“them”?—Every
one of them! —Every one of
who?!—Every one of who
do you think!—I haven’t any
idea!—Then how do you know
they aren’t?
Joseph Heller—Catch 22
The man who trusts men will
make fewer mistakes than he
who distrusts them.
Camillo di Cavour
Our doubts are our traitors.
William Shakespeare
Don’t hold to anger,hurt or
pain.They steal your energy
and keep you from love.
Leo Buscaglia
All stealing is comparative.If
you come to absolutes,pray
who does not steal?
RalphWaldo Emerson
If you steal from one author,
it’s plagiarism;if you steal from
many,it’s research.
Wilson Mizner

<<<PAGE 223>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
200
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A JEWISH RABBI IN A TINY ROOM
FULL OF MANUSCRIPTS AND
BOOKS,PERFORMING HIS DUTY
Commentary: ‘A Jewish Rabbi in a Tiny Room Full of Manuscripts
and Books’ shows a man of religion in a constant state of learning,
interpreting and reinterpreting text. His job is to translate spiritual
teachings and administer them on behalf of the community that
he represents. The fact that the Old Testament, the Talmud, and
other religious writings have changing relevance in different
cultures signifies that we need to be aware of our established
wisdom, but remain open-minded to the way we apply that
wisdom to your modern day-to-day life. In order to have freedom
of thought, the ‘Rabbi’ needs to have a thorough knowledge of
the history of the foundations of the society he represents.
Oracle: There is age old wisdom and established tradition which
has survived to this day. These teachings can give rise to rituals
and initiations that are essential to our well-being at important
landmarks in our lives such as births, weddings, funerals, etc.
However, how relevant are some of the laws that pertain to
these in today’s world? Although they should be delivered and
accepted with reverence, taking things literally from ancient
texts is probably not always going to provide you with what is
needed for modern solutions. Instead, take heed of the ethics
and morals behind them, and translate them to become relevant
to your life and times. You may need to access this knowledge
though instruction or through an inner search in order to deal
with your situation. Sometimes we feel a huge resistance to
having to do things that we must perform, but if these are tried
and true things, then they can lead us onwards and upwards by
complying with society’s needs and mores. Remind yourself of
why there is a need to ‘Perform’ these ‘Duties’. This may help to
keep you motivated when you’re feeling doubtful.
Keywords: Connection with ancient sources of truth and
understanding. Faith in abiding laws. Inherited wisdom. Ancient
books. Fundamentalism. Rituals, social and otherwise. Initiation
ceremonies. Book work. Studying and worshipping. Doing deeds
on behalf of the community. Religious services. Writings that
reveal rules for living. Lawyers. Advocates. Hidden knowledge.
The Caution: Religious dogmatism. Following the rules of “the
book”. Sticking to what convention says. Losing one’s sense of
individuality. Over-inflated sense of self. Distrust or hate of
different religions, backgrounds or ethnic origins. Restrictive
rules.
Libra 20
I felt there’s a wealth in Jewish
tradition,a great inheritance.I’d
be a jerk not to take advantage
of it.
HermanWouk
Rituals are important.Nowadays
it’s hip not to be married.I’m not
interested in being hip.
John Lennon
I call that mind free which
jealously guards its intellectual
rights and powers,which calls
no man master,which does not
content itself with a passive or
hereditary faith,and receives
new truth as an angel from
Heaven.
Woody Allen
Look for the good,not the evil,in
the conduct of members of the
family.
Jewish Proverb
All sorts of spiritual gifts come
through privations,if they are
accepted.
Janet Erskine Stuart
Any ritual is an opportunity for
transformation.
Starhawk
Impart as much as you can of
your spiritual being to those who
are on the road with you,and
accept as something precious
what comes back to you from
them.
Albert Schweitzer

<<<PAGE 224>>>
LIBRA
O
201
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CROWD UPON A BEACH
Commentary: ‘A Crowd Upon a Beach’ pictures people coming
together to enjoy the fresh air, the sunshine and the water. They
leave behind the worries of their everyday lives as they take time
out to enjoy the freedom and the freshness of the environment.
Some will be swimming, some building castles in the sand,
whilst others may be talking or reading or soaking up the sun
and the ocean breeze. There can be a feeling of being blessed or
lucky, as many people would like to be able to take this time out
to enjoy the elements without worrying about money, work or
responsibilities. People often stop and talk to each other, whether
they have met before or not. Chance meetings with friends can
be great fun, as can making new friends.
Oracle: You may feel a need to get back in touch with your
emotions by relaxing and taking things easy. Joining with others
of like mind, in a natural setting and feeling the release that can
come from reminding yourself of the joys and wonders of nature
can be like taking a holiday. People love the feeling of the sun,
the ocean air and the sand between their toes. Whether they are
on the ‘Beach’, or not, this Symbol implies that people can relax
together, even if they don’t know each other, and revive their
spirits through taking time off. The feelings of guilt or worry about
being “at work”, or doing what one should be doing, shouldn’t be
entertained as this is a time for leisure, whether this is alone or
amongst others. Is there a problem in revealing your body and
being seen in a swimming costume or some other scant clothing?
These issues really need to be dropped as most people really aren’t
concerned with how others look in this environment. There is
quite possibly a need to get back in touch with your emotions
and to join with others for some light recreation.
Keywords: Simple gatherings and sharing in natural values.
Watching people swim, run, skip and play. People getting loose
and revealing their bodies. Remembering the basic elements
of life. Marveling at nature. Getting back to the basics of life.
Enjoyment. Relaxing social constraints. Picnic hampers, towels,
sunblock. Wanting a tan. Queues and lines. Swimming in the
collective unconsciousness. Leisure times.
The Caution: Avoiding close interaction with others. Being just
one of many who desire their moment in the sun. Drowning –with
others or alone. Sunburn. Sunstroke. Feeling like just one of the
many. Dehydration. Traffic that hampers flow. Loneliness.
Libra 21
Nobody goes there anymore.It’s
too crowded.
Yogi Berra
In every out thrust headland,in
every curving beach,in every
grain of sand there is a story of
the earth.
Rachel Carson
Miami Beach is where neon
goes to die.
Lenny Bruce
The sea does not reward those
who are too anxious,too
greedy,or too impatient.One
should lie empty,open,choice
less as a beach—waiting for a
gift from the sea.
Anne Morrow Lindbergh
A crowd is not company,and
faces are but a gallery of
pictures.
Francis Bacon
The lives of happy people are
dense with their own doings
— crowded,active,thick....But
the sorrowing are nomads,on
a plain with few landmarks
and no boundaries;sorrow’s
horizons are vague and its
demands are few.
Larry McMurtry
Among them,but not of them.
Lord Byron

<<<PAGE 225>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
202
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHILD GIVING BIRDS A DRINK AT A
FOUNTAIN
Commentary: ‘A Child’ is seen ‘Giving Birds a Drink at a Fountain’.
The ‘Child’ is carefree and enjoying the freshness of the outdoors
and the thrill of watching the ‘Birds’ having and enjoying the
‘Drink at the Fountain’. The interaction of the ‘Child’ and the
‘Birds’ can bring joy and wonder. ‘Birds’ represent spiritual
messages, the ‘Child’ is the physical presence of innocence,
naivety and fun, and the water represents the flow and empathy
of emotional energy. This also symbolizes the joy and trust of
innocence as it is a ‘Child’ that holds the ‘Fountain’ open for the
‘Birds’. This does not mean that an adult is unable to be trusted.
Instead, it shows that we must maintain the innocence and
openness of a ‘Child’ in order to be connected to and aware of,
simple, momentary and more spiritual energies.
Oracle: ‘Children’ demonstrate a generosity of spirit and take
delight in giving to beings less able than themselves. They
give freely and unconditionally. This Symbol shows that we
must assume the shaping and caring of a ‘Child’ in order to be
connected to and aware of, the needs and worries of others.
The problem that can come out of adulthood is the expectation
of return, the “what’s in it for me” routine. It is when an
experience is its own true reward that we achieve openness
and joy in responding to the energies that surround us everyday.
Someone's needs, hopes and wishes are in need of sustenance or
refreshment. Whether this is you or someone else, simple gestures
can revitalize situations beyond your expectations. If you, or
another, have the resources to nourish or to help someone or
something, the effort required will be minimal, but the rewards
may be well worth it. Show some unconditional generosity and
enjoy the resulting experience.
Keywords: Enjoyment experienced in nourishing simple souls.
The need for water. Simple pleasures. Innocence. Birdbaths.
Fountains. Water. Innocent reaching out to others. Taking
time out for others. Spontaneous gifts. Moments of innocence,
spontaneity and fun. Putting aside your own needs. Stopping to
help others in need. Enjoying interactions with people, birds or
animals.
The Caution: Looking for recognition for small deeds. Being
condescending to others. Always feeling like you have to look
after others, whether they are big or small. Interfering with
nature. Being naive. Feeling that one is the font of everything.
Libra 22
To cultivate kindness is a
valuable part of the business
of life.
Johnson
A child is a quicksilver fountain
Spilling over with tomorrows
and tomorrows And that is why
She is richer than you and I.
Tom Bradley
Love and kindness are never
wasted.They always make a
difference.They bless the one
who receives them,and they
bless you,the giver.
Barbara De Angelis
Practice random acts of
kindness.
Modern Saying
Constant kindness can
accomplish much.As the sun
makes ice melt,kindness causes
misunderstanding,mistrust,
and hostility to evaporate.
Albert Schweitzer
He who sows courtesy reaps
friendship,and he who plants
kindness gathers love.
Saint Basil
Life is made up,not of great
sacrifices or duties,but of little
things,in which smiles and
kindness,and small obligations
win and preserve the heart.
Humphrey Davy

<<<PAGE 226>>>
LIBRA
O
203
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CHANTICLEER’S VOICE
HERALDS THE RISING SUN WITH
ENTHUSIASTIC TONES
Commentary: ‘Chanticleer’s Voice Heralds the Rising Sun With
Enthusiastic Tones’. The word ‘Chanticleer’ is from the French
“Chanter Clair” meaning to sing clearly. He ‘Heralds the Rising
Sun With Enthusiastic Tones’. As this ‘Chanticleer’ is quite clearly
the symbol of a rooster, it’s most likely he sings loudly, as well. It
is also said that the cock crows loudly in order to scare away evil
spirits. The cock was dedicated to Apollo in ancient mythology
because he gives notice of ‘The Rising Sun’. Just like the cock,
some people are heralds of the new day or the new age, and they
notice and give voice to this emergence, often ahead of time.
Most often the 'Voice' that is heard is enthusiastically received,
but there are times that what is said is rejected, ignored or reviled
or it’s perceived as loud and irritating.
Oracle: In this situation, someone may feel that they are the
driving force behind what’s happening. There may be a strong
need, or desire, to draw attention to themself. This may be
someone in the public eye, or someone who feels that they
should be listened to, or that things cannot continue without
them. Rightly or wrongly, there’s often a claiming of responsibility
for things. There is always a need to learn to listen, rather than
just crowing about one’s self, one’s ideas, or life. The sound of
someone’s voice can become grating and annoying when they
don’t know when, or how, to stop. It can be that the ‘Chanticleer
With Enthusiastic Tones’ overstates his role somewhat and
there can be a blurring of the concept as to whether the cock
causes or simply heralds the new day. Done correctly, however,
‘Enthusiastic Tones Heralding the Rising Sun’ can be wonderfully
stirring and can move people to new beginnings and realizations
that they’ve not had before.
Keywords: Anticipating new opportunities. Waking early. Being a
morning person. Having a clear, beautiful or loud voice. Speaking
up when it’s needed. Heralding the new age. Seeing things ahead
of their time. Being attuned to cosmic forces. Change or renewal.
Always being on the go. Being eternally vigilant. Alarms that
spur to action.
The Caution: Overstating ones role, talents or abilities. Needing
a wake-up call (literally and symbolically). Crowing about
things—disturbing others. Being noisy when others are trying
to sleep. Being loud and irritating.
Libra 23
Faith is the bird that feels the
light when the dawn is still dark.
RabindranathTagore
Said a Rooster,“I’d have you all
know I am nearly the whole of
the show;Why,the Sun every
morn Gets up with the dawn,
For the purpose of hearing me
crow!"
EthelWatts Mumford
Dawn does not come twice to
awaken a man.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
Great braggers,little doers.
Romanian Proverb
One filled with joy preaches
without preaching.
MotherTeresa
It takes a person who is wide
awake to make his dream come
true.
Roger Babson
The sun sets without thy
assistance.
TheTalmud
She understood how much
louder a cock can crow in its
own farmyard than elsewhere.
AnthonyTrollope
Noise proves nothing.Often
a hen who has merely laid an
egg cackles as if she had laid an
asteroid.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 227>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
204
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A THIRD WING ON THE LEFT SIDE OF
A BUTTERFLY
Commentary: ‘A Third Wing on the Left Side of a Butterfly’ is
an image of imbalance and distortion combined with beauty and
grace. A butterfly with three wings would be a beautiful thing to
see. However, having a ‘Third Wing’ may look lovely, but it would
make it very difficult to fly. Whilst we may marvel at such an oddity,
it would prove to be very difficult for the ‘Butterfly’ itself. It may
look curiously beautiful, but in reality it can be difficult surviving
in the physical world with such a difficulty or handicap. In French,
“gauche” literally means “left”, and it has the extended meanings
“awkward” and “clumsy”. In fact, “awkward” itself comes from the
Middle English “awke”, meaning “turned the wrong way” or “left-
handed”. On the other hand, “adroit” and “dexterity” have their
roots in words meaning “right” or “on the right side”. We see this
fragility in creative people like Van Gogh, Robin Williams or Spike
Milligan.
Oracle: Understanding and accepting fragility and differences in
others can give us greater empathy for those that have difficulty
operating efficiently in this world. Emotional breakdowns, fears and
phobias can be symptoms of being too sensitive, not necessarily as
a fault, but as a response to an unforgiving and tough world. When
the transformation into full potential occurs it is a wonderful thing
but you may feel that you are unnaturally developed in the emotive,
intuitiverealms.Instinctmaybeswampinglogic,andwhilstthiscan
beverycreative,itwouldbeagoodideatotrytoregainsomebalance.
This can point to threesomes of any kind and just as threesomes
are considered to be an unbalanced relationship, ‘A Third Wing’
can imply imbalance and an inability to get anywhere. A ‘Butterfly’
can be someone who is bright when conditions are favorable, but
is “done for” when the clouds gather. This Symbol can also indicate
lop-sidedness on the physical level, such as having one side of the
body imbalanced in some way. Balance is difficult to achieve with
this Symbol, but is something that needs to be strived for.
Keywords: Creative overbalance. Bodily impairments and
handicaps. Being light, flippant and fluttering from thing to thing.
Over-sensitivities. Oddities. Beautiful imperfections. Idiot savants.
Imbalances. One side of the body being more perfect than the other.
Wings, arms, legs, feet.
TheCaution:Unrealisticrelianceonbeingdifferent.Obsessionwith
strange things. Feeling useless and out of place. Flapping around and
not getting anywhere. Restlessness and nervousness. Lopsidedness.
Impatience.
Libra 24
I'd give my right arm to be
ambidextrous
Yogi Berra
Handicaps are really to be used
another way to benefit yourself
and others.
StevieWonder
I thank God for my handicaps,
for through them,I have found
myself,my work and my God.
Helen Keller
Everything in moderation.
Proverb
You can have too much of a
good thing.
Proverb
Too much of a good thing is
wonderful.
MaeWest

<<<PAGE 228>>>
LIBRA
O
205
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE SIGHT OF AN AUTUMN LEAF
BRINGS TO A PILGRIM THE SUDDEN
REVELATION OF THE MYSTERY OF
LIFE AND DEATH
Commentary: ‘The Sight of an Autumn Leaf Brings to a Pilgrim the
Sudden Revelation of the Mystery of Life and Death’ is an image of
having the ability to see much more in the simple things than most
people ever notice. A ‘Pilgrim’ is a traveler, a voyager—someone
who’s on a journey. Often the ‘Pilgrim’s’ journey is a spiritual trek
or a trip to increase the level of experience and understanding. The
‘Sudden Revelation of the Mystery of Life and Death’ shows that the
person on the journey is able to look at the smallest and sometimes
mostfleeting things and find layers and layersofmeaningthat others
wouldn't.
Oracle: This Symbol can indicate an insight into something that can
change the course of one’s life. The ‘Autumn Leaf’ in this Symbol
brings to the ‘Pilgrim’ the 'Sudden' understanding of the cycle of life,
death and rebirth. The ‘Mystery of Life’ seems to unfold before the
‘Pilgrim’s’innervision.The‘Pilgrim’canseethattheseedhasgrown
into a tree and the tree’s leaves have now fallen with the change of
the seasons, ready for the new birth in the spring. The ‘Autumn Leaf’
becomes the composted material that nourishes the new seeds and
fosters and nourishes new growth. Often we go through our lives
without noticing the information that can be gained from looking
at small or seemingly insignificant things. The ‘Revelation’ that is
experiencedcanchangeone’slife,iftimeistakentostoplongenough
to really look into it. At this point, you may feel that you’ve learnt
much but have grown tired of seeking information for life’s meaning
through more conventional channels. Look for the answer to your
probleminsimple,everydaymoments.Theyarefleeting,buttheyare
around you. Look for the signs, they can have profound effects.
Keywords:Seasonaladjustments.Fleetinginspiration.Seeingthings
in their own time. Spiritual revelations. Conversations with God.
Feeling blessed. The beauty and timelessness of nature. Contacts
with nature spirits. Angelic visions. Photography and having a
photographic mind. Being here now. Pilgrims and their journeys.
The Hadj pilgrimage. Solving problems. Quick and deep minds.
Snapshots in time.
TheCaution: Focusing on things that have no lasting value or are no
longerrelevant.Lookingforanswersineverything,thereforemissing
out on the big picture that’s right in front of you. Making a big deal
out of insignificant or everyday occurrences.
Libra 25
Toseetheworldinagrainofsand,
Andaheaveninawildflower;
Holdinfinityinthepalmofyour
hand,Andeternityinanhour.
William Blake
A traveler without observation is
a bird without wings.
Moslih Eddin Saadi
Perpetual inspiration is as
necessary to the life of goodness,
holiness and happiness
as perpetual respiration is
necessary to animal life.
Andrew Bonar Law
To see a hillside white with
dogwood bloom is to know a
particular ecstasy of beauty,but
to walk the gray winter woods
and find the buds which will
resurrect that beauty in another
May is to partake of continuity.
Hal Borland
A man should hear a little music,
read a little poetry,and see a
fine picture every day of his
life,in order that worldly cares
may not obliterate the sense
of the beautiful which God has
implanted in the human soul.
Goethe
Nature will bear the closest
inspection.She invites us to lay
our eye level with her smallest
leaf,and take an insect view of
its plain.
Henry DavidThoreau

<<<PAGE 229>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
206
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EAGLE AND A LARGE WHITE
DOVE TURNING CONSTANTLY INTO
EACH OTHER
Commentary: The image of ‘An Eagle and a Large White Dove’
are represented in many facets of our lives. Their symbols can be
found in several religions, most notably Christianity, heraldry and
hermeticsm. They represent opposite sides of the same spectrum.
The ‘Eagle’ is symbolic of strength, stamina and skyward flight. It
is a bird of prey and can be seen as aggressive and domineering.
It is also considered to be the king of the birds. The 'Dove' is a
symbol of peace, tenderness, innocence and gentleness. When
they are ‘Turning Constantly Into Each Other’ we are able to
embody a strong sense of grounding in one’s own power and at
the same time being aware of and awake to love and the wonderful
messages that come from the emotional and spiritual realms.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, there is most likely a need to
mix, and integrate, the principle of the will with the principle of
the emotions. This symbolizes having the will and the strength
to love and to do so with energetic conviction. It is the ideals
of being strong, but not aggressive; firm without being overly
assertive, and confident without being oppressive that creates
a sense of peace. Equally, it is a sense of peace and love that
can energize your convictions into action. However, there may
be some confusion around whether to use force or love in
this situation. This Symbol may also indicate that somebody’s
behavior is unpredictable and sometimes off-putting. Someone
may be rather schizoid and flounder around from one response
to another, leading others to wonder what sort of response they
are likely to receive at any given time. This could be as a result
of a chemical imbalance, the use of drugs or alcohol, or merely
their personality. Using moderation and the alternation of these
responses will probably lead to a solution—being firm and yet
kind.
Keywords: Tempering one’s will with love and bolstering up
one’s emotional responses with strength. Cooperation of mind,
will, spirit and heart. Schizophrenia. Eagles and doves. Being
strong and soft at the same time. Adopting the attitudes of spirit,
power and love.
The Caution: Being “all over the place” with reactions. Being
changeable. Not acting for the purpose of a definite outcome.
Confusing others with conflicting behavior. Not knowing what
to expect next. On one minute—off the next.
Libra 26
For hatred does not cease by
hatred at any time:hatred
ceases by love—this is an old
rule.
The Dhammapada
Censure pardons the ravens but
rebukes the doves.
Latin Proverb
We must combine the
toughness of the serpent with
the softness of the dove,a
tough mind and a tender heart.
Martin Luther King,Jr.
We are going to have peace
even if we have to fight for it.
Dwight D.Eisenhower
“Oh,wise one!”said the eagle,
while he sank,In deeper and
ever deep’ning thought—”Oh
Wisdom! like a dove thou
speakest!”
JohannWolfgang von Goethe
The eagle suffers little birds to
sing,and is not careful what they
mean thereby.
William Shakespeare
Shall eagles not be eagles?
Wrens be wrens?
Lord AlfredTennyson
The real and lasting victories
are those of peace,and not war.
RalphWaldo Emerson

<<<PAGE 230>>>
LIBRA
O
207
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN AIRPLANE SAILS HIGH IN THE
BRIGHT CLEAR SKY
Commentary: ‘An Airplane Sails High in the Bright Clear Sky’ is
an image of flight and escape and gives the feeling of unfettered
freedom. It can symbolize being carefree and not bound to
the everyday, grounded realities that most people are caught
up in. Being in the ‘Airplane’ can bring a sense of being above
everything, an observer and somewhat detached. We all need
moments of clear, focused detachment and the enjoyment of
life’s pleasures.
Oracle: There may be some people in this situation that need
to be recognized, embraced or noticed in some way. Maybe it is
you that has to do this, or to receive it. You, or another, may feel
that they are somehow “above” or beyond the situation, but how
long can one go on flying so high? Somebody in this situation is
probably avoiding the reality of what’s going on, or they may be
avoiding having close, intimate interactions with people around
them. How long can there continue to be ‘Bright Clear Sky’? We
all need to come down to earth after some incredible or gravity
defying experience, even if we don’t want to—or don’t feel
ready to. For now, there may be the feeling that you are above
the situation and are being carried beyond this time or place to
something completely new. There is probably a need for calm
objective observation. ‘Sailing’ above difficulties, and people,
may bring new information to light; things that you weren’t
able to “see”, or know, previously. For the moment, ‘Sailing’ on
and enjoying both the experience and the view may be what’s
needed. However, sooner or later you’re going to have to land
back in reality. Are you prepared not only for the flight but also
for the landing? What are the real down-to-earth needs that are
being shown and that need attention?
Keywords: Transcending difficulties or escape from reality.
Optimism that knows no bounds. A bird’s eye view of things.
Detachment. Objectivity. Chemical influences. Freedom from
life’s routine. Pilots and planes. Clear air turbulence. Roller coaster
rides. Awareness of up and down, left and right, in and out. Sense
of destination. Decreasing gravity. Acceleration of time. Fisheye
lens. The need for navigation.
The Caution: Difficulty in seeing the true details of what’s going
on. Escape from reality. Running out of fuel. Egoism. Playing with
gravity. Disconnection from the everyday world.
Libra 27
Flying might not be all plain
sailing,but the fun of it is worth
the price.
Amelia Ehrhart
Words have no wings but they
can fly many thousands of
miles.
Korean Proverb
There are no signposts in the
sky to show a man has passed
that way before.There are no
channels marked.The flier
breaks each second into new
uncharted seas.
Anne Morrow Lindbergh
The airplane stays up because
it doesn’t have the time to fall.
OrvilleWright
Twinkle,twinkle,little bat! How
I wonder what you’re at! Up
above the world you fly! Like a
tea tray in the sky.
Lewis Carroll
Faith without works is like a
bird without wings;though she
may hop with her companions
on earth,yet she will never fly
with them to heaven.
Francis Beaumont
If there were any justice in
this world,people would
occasionally be permitted to fly
over pigeons.
Gene Brown

<<<PAGE 231>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
208
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN ALONE IN DEEP GLOOM.
UNNOTICED,ANGELS ARE COMING
TO HIS AID
Commentary: ‘A Man Alone in Deep Gloom’, is an image of
someone who’s feeling very depressed, alone and somehow
forsaken. As he’s in ‘Deep Gloom’, it seems that he’s hit rock
bottom and wonders if things can ever or will ever improve. He
may have just about given up hope when ‘Unnoticed, Angels Are
Coming to His Aid’.
Oracle: This Symbol is very much about letting go and trusting.
Just when someone needs rescue and salvation the most, it
will often appear as if from out of nowhere. So often ‘Gloom’
is brought about by depression, not knowing what is going to
happen, or assuming that something bad is about to happen. It
may be that ‘Gloom’ is disabling any ability to see one's ‘Angels’ or
accept any support that is being offered. It is not always necessary
to ‘Notice’ your ‘Angels’, but this Symbol is asking you to open
up the them and to allow them to help in some way. Whether
the ‘Man’, and this could be you or another, realizes it or not,
things are somehow going to improve. This Symbol shows that
it’s been a difficult time, but it is just beginning to dawn on you
that you are being “helped” as the ‘Angels Come’ to ‘Aid’ in some
way. There will be a slow, but sure, realization that things are
getting better. If you continue to see the ‘Gloom’ and wallow, you
will put up a subconscious, or conscious, resistance to help and
may continue on a downward spiral. Look at the big picture and
evaluate just how serious the situation is. If it can be mended, let
it mend. Don’t get stuck in misery. The ‘Angels’ that come to help
can be people, but it can also be your higher mind that brings
this ‘Aid’. Hope, faith and trust will help to move this situation
on. Work on changing your attitude to your situation and watch
the “light” returning.
Keywords: Feelings of not being alone. Awareness of spiritual
help in times of need. Salvation versus depression. Feeling like
one’s luck is about to change. Improvements in the pipeline.
Changes in the “weather”. Helpers arriving just when they’re
needed. Brightening influences. Angels and spiritual forces for
good. Guardian angels.
The Caution: Unrealistic reliance on spiritual agencies or help
from others. Feeling like no one cares or that no one is listening.
Being alone and forgotten. Losing faith in things getting better.
Refusing help. Misery and gloom and doom.
Libra 28
We can easily forgive a child
who is afraid of the dark;the
real tragedy of life is when men
are afraid of the light.
Plato
Confront the dark parts of
yourself,and work to banish
them with illumination and
forgiveness.Your willingness to
wrestle with your demons will
cause your angels to sing.Use
the pain as fuel,as a reminder
of your strength.
AugustWilson
As soon as your consciousness
is right,God is there.He is not
hiding from you,you are hiding
from Him.
ParamahamsaYogananda
In times like these,it helps to
recall that there have ALWAYS
been times like these.
Paul Harvey
If there is no God,who pops up
the next Kleenex?
Art Hoppe
Make friends with the angels,
who though invisible are
always with you… Often invoke
them,constantly praise them,
and make good use of their
help and assistance in all your
temporal and spiritual affairs.
Saint Francois de Sales

<<<PAGE 232>>>
LIBRA
O
209
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
MANKIND’S VAST ENDURING
EFFORT FOR KNOWLEDGE
TRANSFERABLE FROM GENERATION
TO GENERATION
Commentary: ‘Mankind’s Vast Enduring Effort For Knowledge
Transferable From Generation to Generation’ shows the handing
down of learning or ‘Knowledge' from mothers and fathers to
daughtersandsons.Byinstruction,byobservationandbyacceptance,
we pass information to the next ‘Generation’, as this allows for the
process to continue and develop from ‘Generation to Generation’.
Oracle: This Symbol is about conscious awareness and how we use
this capacity to know and to ‘Transfer’ information from our mind
to another mind through communication. This communication can
be in the spoken word, the written word or through dance, body
language or through our deeds. We pass on the biological nature
of ‘Knowledge’ through our genes, our conscious ‘Knowledge’ by
teaching, our social ‘Knowledge’ by example and training. Genetic
memory is another way that things can be passed down from
‘Generationto Generation’. It can besaid thatthe‘Knowledge’ of the
universe is within us, but bringing this out into our consciousness is
something that occurs over time and through effort. The most likely
“students” are those that are constantly around us, can relate to our
activities and are inspired by our history and love—this often being
our friends and family. However, students, as well as teachers, can
popupanywhere,especiallywhenthere’saneedfortheinformation
to be ‘Transferred’. With this Symbol, there can be an outreaching
to others through awareness along with a desire to teach, as well
as to learn. There is more to wisdom than just knowing. In the end,
it’s what is done with this ‘Knowledge’ that creates wisdom. It is
through knowledge and understanding that we can bridge the gap
between ourselves and others.
Keywords: Interpreting and conveying beliefs and ideas. The
desire to pass on something to others. Handing down possessions
or knowledge. Knowledge being changed, modified or updated.
Teaching by example. The wisdom of the ancestors. Research
into history. Striving for answers. Books and the spoken word.
Encyclopedias and reference books. The gift of knowledge.
TheCaution: A belief that one knows it all. Information, knowledge
or riches inherited by only the select few. Reliance on tradition.
Fundamentalism. Doing what’s always been done, regardless of
why.
Libra 29
Childrenwishfatherslooked
butwiththeireyes;fathersthat
childrenwiththeirjudgment
looked;andeithermaybewrong.
William Shakespeare
Employ your time in improving
yourself by other men’s writings
so that you shall come easily by
what others have labored hard
for.
Socrates
That must be wonderful;I have
no idea of what it means.
Jean-Baptiste Moliere
Education is the transmission of
civilization.Ariel Durant
Today’schildrenarerequiredto
learnwhatmostpeopleinformer
timeswereforbiddentoknow.
Ashleigh Brilliant
We are the people our parents
warned us about.
Anon
By the time a man realizes that
maybe his father was right,he
usually has a son who thinks
he’s wrong.
CharlesWadsworth
Ideas cross mountains,borders,
and seas.They go anywhere a
man can go…
The HoustonTimes
To be ignorant of what
occurred before you were born
is to remain always a child.
MarcusT.Cicero

<<<PAGE 233>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
O
210
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THREE MOUNDS OF KNOWLEDGE
ON A PHILOSOPHER’S HEAD
Commentary: ‘Three Mounds of Knowledge on a Philosopher’s
Head’ brings to mind the science of phrenology, which is the
study of the psychological implications of the bumps and
irregularities on the surface of the skull. This Symbol is also
about the signs that are evident in our physical being which reflect
our inner wisdom. We can often identify people who are learned
by merely looking at the way they present themselves, through
their demeanor. Wisdom can also be reflected in the clarity of the
eyes, a peaceful nature, and calmness in the event of difficulty.
The face may have signs of wisdom in the lack of stress lines, or
the strength of thought lines. A face may show the experience
of life and the wisdom derived from it. Essentially, if we look, it
is possible to see those who are wise and understand life.
Oracle: There is an ability here to read spiritual understandings
into concrete, everyday objects. Several different aspects can be
combined to result in a truly wise outcome. There’s the ability to
be able to pierce through appearances to see the inherent truth
of a situation and bring abstract truths into reality. It can show
concentration on questions of a philosophical nature. There may
be the need to be cautious, however, of always “living in one’s
head”. Constant thinking and talking about philosophical ideas
or intellectualism can cause a strain in relationships when the
partner may want to concentrate on simpler, more emotional
or everyday thoughts. After all, as Voltaire said "Four thousand
volumes of metaphysics will not teach us what the soul is."
Keywords: Looking at the signs. Wisdom that transcends book
knowledge. Philosophy. Having a knowledgeable demeanor.
Being an impressive figure. Making wise decisions regardless
of hard-line opinion. The head, skull or cranium. Knowledge
directed to intellectual or spiritual goals. Predicting the future.
An appearance that shows obvious intelligence. Wit. Style. Seeing
potential in others. Receding hairlines.
TheCaution: Analyzing things too much and reliance on intellect.
Being a “know-it-all”. Having a bossy attitude. Thinking that
doesn’t clarify issues but muddies them. Taking things far too
seriously. People with "highbrow" attitudes. Feeling weighed
down by intellectual concerns.
Libra 30
And still they gazed,and still the
wonder grew,that one small
head could carry all he knew.
Oliver Goldsmith
What if everything is an illusion
and nothing exists? In that case,I
definitely overpaid for my carpet.
Woody Allen
What if nothing exists and we’re
all in somebody’s dream? Or
what’s worse,what if only that
fat guy in the third row exists?
Woody Allen
I don’t know why we are here.
LudwigWittgenstein
Philosophers have merely
interpreted the world.The point
is to change it.
Karl Marx
Plato was a bore.
Friedrich Nietzsche
I have tried too in my time to be
a philosopher but,I don’t know
how,cheerfulness was always
breaking in.
Oliver Edwards
The point of philosophy is to
start with something so simple
as to seem not worth stating,
and to end with something so
paradoxical that no one will
believe it.
Bertrand Russell

<<<PAGE 234>>>
SCORPIO
P
211
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SIGHTSEEING BUS FILLED WITH
TOURISTS
Commentary:‘ASight-SeeingBusFilledWithTourists’isanimageof
people touring around, seeing the sights, taking in the atmosphere
and learning about people and places that are new or foreign to
them. There can be a feeling of knowing one’s destination, having a
map or guide, but not really knowing what it is actually like. There
can be the feeling of being an observer, but also being observed by
others yourself.
Oracle: Sometimes we find ourselves in situations where we don’t
understand the customs or the language of those around us. You
may need a tour guide to help you acclimatize or to make the most
of this journey. If you are traveling with others, there may be a need
to be punctual at all times as others could leave without you in their
eagerness for getting on with things. New friendships can be made,
whilst others lost. Take in as much information as possible through
sight, sound, touch and smells, as this will enable you to learn
from your experiences. Pictures, postcards, leaflets and souvenirs
from your journey may be useful reminders. Keep an eye on your
belongings, especially if there are people you don’t know or trust
journeying with you on the ‘Bus’. Remember that “belongings” may
manifestoneverylevel:thephysical,mental,emotional,andspiritual.
This also applies to anything that proves your unique identity. Being
in an unknown place without identification can be time wasting and
confusingandcanleadtoasenseofalienationorabandonment.Also,
trying to communicate with people who don’t understand can lead
to feeling misunderstood, disconnected and shut out. None of this is
necessary, of course, as long as you’re awake and conscious. Maybe
it’s time to stop being a “spectator” in life and to become more of a
participant. Whatever is happening, enjoy the ride, learn from the
journey and take in all that is possible.
Keywords: Observing life. Feeling disconnected from reality. UFO’s
andaliens.Seeinghowotherpeoplelive.Watchingfromafar.Tourists,
traveling,buses.Suitcasesandluggage.Cameras,pictures,souvenirs.
Tour guides. Timing and being on time. The untried and untrodden
or the same old road. Getting lost in something for hours. Foreign
territories. New ways of seeing.
TheCaution: Feelings of naivety and gullibility. Feeling like an alien
eveninfamiliarsurroundings.Makingassumptionsaboutothers’lives.
Notfittingin.Expectingthingswithoutanypersonalexpenditureor
effort.Gettingoutofone’sdepth.Havingdifficultycallingone’sown
agenda. Separation anxiety. Inability to concentrate.
Scorpio 1
Though we travel the world
over to find the beautiful,we
must carry it with us or we find
it not.
RalphWaldo Emerson
If a man be gracious and
courteous to strangers,it shows
he is a citizen of the world.
Francis Bacon
If you want to understand
democracy,spend less time in
the library with Plato and more
time in the buses with people.
Simeon Strunsky
At six one morning,Will went
out in jeans and frayed sweater
to buy a quart of milk.A tourist
bus went by.The megaphone
was directed at him.“There’s
one,”it said.That was in the
l960s.Ever since,he’s wondered.
There’s one what?
Renata Adler
The more I traveled the more
I realized that fear makes
strangers of people who should
be friends.
Shirley MacLaine
The voyage of discovery is not
in seeking new landscapes but
in having new eyes.
Marcel Proust
The innocents abroad.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 235>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
212
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BROKEN BOTTLE AND SPILLED
PERFUME
Commentary: ‘A Broken Bottle and Spilled Perfume’ is an
emotionally evocative image. Something that was once beautiful,
whole, precious and contained now lies ‘Broken’. Its contents have
‘Spilled’ in some way and it is now lost and shattered. ‘Perfume’
can have a beautiful scent–it can transport our hearts and minds
–or it can be rather cheap and nasty, almost giving us a headache.
Regardless of how it actually smells, it can cause quite strong
reactions, particularly on an emotional level. Scents can bring
up memories of people or events from the past; they can even
remind us of things that have been long forgotten. The smell of
‘Perfume’ can release memories of love, longing and desire, but
also anger, hurt and jealousy.
Oracle: Just as ‘Perfume’ is something in a very concentrated
form, you may feel that you’ve been holding in or building up
your emotions. Now something has cracked and everything has
suddenly been let out, ‘Spilled’ or wasted. There is probably little
that can be done about the initial outburst, but now there is a need
to be careful of how you handle the situation, what you say and
what you do as you sort things out. It’s important to remember
that sometimes things need to be ‘Broken’ so that their contents
can be released or revealed and fully appreciated. There can
be a feeling of being completely overwhelmed with emotion
when this Symbol is around. Perhaps you actually want to ‘Spill’
your thoughts and feelings, your “insides”, to let everything go,
but feel stiff, unyielding and all ‘Bottled’ up or contained. Not
knowing how to think or react can lead to overblown reactions.
It can feel as though everything is completely lost or destroyed.
Take heart, though, things can be mended – it just takes time
and clear intention.
Keywords: The memory of things lingering on. Scents or smells
that evoke reactions. The “cat let out of the bag”. The “genie
let out of the bottle”. Dizziness. Passing out. Smelling salts.
Liquids spilled. Anything broken or shattered. Accidents. The
loss of something precious. Alcoholism. Biological and chemical
weapons of all kinds. Being emotionally charged. Cracking up to
crack open. The sound of breaking glass.
The Caution: Things looking good on the outside, but the
contents disappointing. Spilling one’s guts. Things erupting
suddenly. Injured or broken necks or backs. Envy and jealousy.
Broken bones. Smelly remnants.
Scorpio 2
By starving emotions we
become humorless,rigid and
stereotyped;by repressing
them we become literal,
reformatory and holier-than-
thou;encouraged,they perfume
life;discouraged,they poison it.
Joseph Collins
If you drink much from a bottle
marked“poison,”it is almost
certain to disagree with you,
sooner or later.
Lewis Carroll
A single event can awaken
within us a stranger totally
unknown to us.
Antoine de Saint-Exupery
I looked into that empty bottle
and I saw myself.
Grace Metalious
Forgiveness is the scent that
the rose leaves on the heel that
crushes it.
Anon
All the perfumes of Arabia will
not sweeten this little hand.
Shakespeare
Sabean odours from the spicy
shore of arabic the blest.
John Milton
Each loss has its compensation
There is healing for every pain
But the bird with a broken pinion
Never soars so high agaiin.
Hezekiah Butterworth

<<<PAGE 236>>>
SCORPIO
P
213
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
NEIGHBORS HELP IN A HOUSE
RAISING PARTY IN A SMALL VILLAGE
Commentary: ‘Neighbors Help in a House Raising Party in a Small
Village’. They come together to help each other out and to get to
know each other better. By acting as a community, rather than as
separate individuals, small, large, or even very difficult projects
can be undertaken and completed more quickly and efficiently.
People bring their individual talents and expertise with them.
The sharing of these experiences will build community values
and friendships. However, there needs to be a careful watch on
how some people contribute as unskilled labor can end up costing
both time and money.
Oracle: In this situation, great things can be achieved if everyone
works together. Any efforts directed towards giving value and
stability to one’s community will be rewarded in some measure.
Friends and those close to you can help you in any endeavor,
big or small. Having faith in those around you can help bring
a sense of belonging and relationship to your life. Sometimes a
home or a community needs to be built or renovated in some
way, with people coming together and everyone putting in their
share of dedication, commitment and hard labor. There can be
a feeling that there is so much to do on the domestic scene that
other considerations have to be put on hold for the time being.
People must all have a higher sense of purpose, otherwise some
may work at cross-purposes, undermining people or even entire
families. Is there a need for people to assist you because someone
in your life has left behind their responsibilities? If you are in
need of ‘Help’, making a wish for assistance to arrive may bring
a bigger response than you expected!
Keywords: Cooperation. Real estate deals. Community concerns.
Buying or building houses. Renting apartments and homes.
Needing help to find shelter. The agreement of neighbors to
maintain community harmony. “Raising the roof”. Parties.
Dormitories. Having to consider the needs of lots of people. Match
making. Community halls. Understanding what it takes to make
a village of people. Communal governance or being blocked by
rules, laws and regulations of bureaucracy. Homeless shelters.
Tools. Building expertise. Helping hands.
The Caution: Taking advantage of generosity. Refusing to
cooperate in group endeavors. Building bigger and better things.
Bickering over who does what. Not trusting people’s input.
Scorpio 3
Light is the task where many
share the toil.
Homer
Rome wasn’t built in a day.
Proverb
Alone we can do so little;
together we can do so much.
Helen Keller
Build it and they will come!
Fields Of Dreams Movie
If a house be divided against
itself,that house cannot stand.
The Bible
Regard your neighbor’s gain
as your own gain,and your
neighbor’s loss as your own loss.
Tai Shang KanYing P’Ien
The hands that help are better
far than the lips that pray.
Robert G.Ingersoll
A city is a large community
where people are lonesome
together.
Herbert Prochno
There are no passengers on
Spaceship Earth.Everybody’s
crew.
Marshall McLuhan
Imagine what a harmonious
world it could be if every single
person,both young and old
shared a little of what he is
good at doing.
Quincy Jones

<<<PAGE 237>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
214
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A YOUTH HOLDING A LIGHTED
CANDLE IN A DEVOTIONAL RITUAL
GAINS A SENSE OF THE GREAT
‘OTHER WORLD’
Commentary: ‘A Youth Holding a Lighted Candle in a Devotional
Ritual Gains a Sense of the Great ‘Other World’’. The ‘Candle’
depicts the light that illuminates one’s path and consciousness,
and ‘A Youth’ implies a devotee or aspirant on the path. He
gains ‘A Sense of The Great ‘Other World’ and there’s a feeling
of reverence, possibly awe and ceremony. He may feel that ‘Great
Other Worlds’ are opening up to him.
Oracle: Your situation may require a fresh attitude in order to
create room for new developments and a renewed sense of vitality.
You may be feeling a sense of loneliness and alienation. Any form
of light, perhaps a ‘Candle’ or a torch, needs to be shed on the
dark corners of one’s mind. Try to focus on those things that bring
you a sense of love and fulfillment. A simple ceremony performed
with reverence and respect can bring wonderful results. Simple
rays of hope, such as things like a ‘Candle’ can bring, will remind
you of or give you spiritual and moral strength. Try lighting a
candle and affirming your intentions with a youthful attitude and
watch things change for the better. Indeed, you may find yourself
entering realms that you have only imagined or not truly dreamt
possible. You may be ‘Gaining a Sense of the Great 'Other World’.
Proclaiming a level of devotion to a person, situation or task can
reaffirm that commitment and take it to deeper levels. If you feel
that you are burdened by responsibilities in this situation, take
heart and adopt a sincere and uncomplicated attitude to what you
have to do. There’s purity of heart and motive available to you.
Keywords: Simple ideals. Ceremonies that are pure and
uncomplicated. Affirming intention to the path. The light of
consciousness. Shining a light that brings understanding of things
on the spiritual level. Spiritualist meetings. Feeling overwhelmed.
Enlightenment. Wide-eyed innocence and wonder. Sexual
experiments leading to transcendence. Potency. Devotion to
ritual. Expansion of psychic talents.
The Caution: Naive reliance on insincere promises. Feeling
like someone is too young to be of any worth. False feelings of
reverence and enlightenment. Placebos. Hallucinogens.
Scorpio 4
Better to light a candle than to
curse the darkness.
Chinese Proverb
If you have knowledge,let
others light their candles in it.
Margaret Fuller
Thousands of candles can be
lighted from a single candle,
and the life of the candle will
not be shortened.Happiness
never decreases by being
shared.
Buddha
Go within every day and find
the inner strength so that the
world will not blow your candle
out.
Katherine Dunham
My candle burns at both ends;
It will not last the night;But,ah,
my foes,and oh,my friends— It
gives a lovely light.
Edna St.Vincent Millay
We must view young people not
as empty bottles to be filled,but
as candles to be lit.
Robert H.Shaffer
How far that little candle
throws his beams! So shines a
good deed in a naughty world.
William Shakespeare
Curiosity is the wick in the
candle of learning.
William A.Ward

<<<PAGE 238>>>
SCORPIO
P
215
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MASSIVE,UNCHANGING ROCKY
SHORE RESISTS THE POUNDING OF
THE SEA
Commentary: ‘A Massive, Unchanging Rocky Shore Resists the
Pounding of the Sea’. This Symbol shows how strong the ‘Rocky
Shore’is,orneedstobe,to‘Resist’therelentless‘PoundingoftheSea’.
The ‘Rockiness’ of the ‘Shore’ is the slowly built result of millions of
stormsthathavegonebefore.Thestormshavegonewithoutmuchof
a trace, but the beach remains, its contours changing very slowly.
Oracle: The elements of this situation are rock-solid and any efforts
to change them may take a long time and a lot of energy. With this
Symbol one can feel under assault from a larger and crueler reality,
but there is a degree of strength available with which you can resist.
You’re possibly dealing with trying to change the face of the rock-
hard and established reality of life. You may find that you are under
emotionalassault,howeveryouareprobablystrongenoughtotakeit.
How can you really make any difference in this situation, especially
if ‘The Pounding’ has been happening for so long? Sometimes it
looks like the old and established is going to give way, but then
stubbornnessorresistancesetsinandnothingchanges—allremains
the same. This can be good or difficult, depending on which side
of this situation you are placed. If you want to keep things as they
are, there’s a good chance that when the storm is over everything
will go back to being much the same as it was before. That’s fine, if
that’s what you want, but if you’re trying to make changes that’s a
different and much harder story. ‘Rocks’ will only wear down after
a very long period of ‘Pounding’ and battering. However, consistent
persistence can lead to the achievement of difficult outcomes and
objectives. Perhaps love and compassion need to be employed.
How long can things continue with the same energy? How long
can people endure without changing? Consider your chances for
success. You may be ‘Pounding’ the wrong shore. Wait for the ‘Seas’
to calm and look at your true emotional motivations. How long can
one keep doing this?
Keywords: Relentless, unchanging reality. The establishment.
Feelingbatteredandbruised.Theneedtoholdontorealityindifficult
situations. Sticking with something no matter what the cost or how
longittakes.Chinesewatertorture.Evolution.Endurance.Pounding
waves, rocks and sand.
The Caution: Stubborn acts leading to inertia, not growth. Tedious
negotiations. Shooting yourself in the foot. Teenage rebellion.
Fighting the elements.
Scorpio 5
The drops of rain make a hole in
the stone,not by violence,but by
oft falling.
Lucretius
The sea complains upon a
thousand shores.
Alexander Smith
It struck me while I was sitting
here;everything changes but
the sea.
William B.Davis
Life leaps like a geyser for those
who drill through the rock of
inertia.
Alexis Carrel
When much dispute has past,
we find our tenets just the same
as last.
Alexander Pope
In the confrontation between
the stream and the rock,the
stream always wins—not
through strength,but by
perseverance.
H.Jackson Brown
Constant dripping wears away
a stone.
Proverb
Deep in the sea are riches
beyond compare.But if you seek
safety,it is on the shore.
Saadi of Shiraz

<<<PAGE 239>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
216
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GOLD RUSH TEARS PEOPLE AWAY
FROM THEIR NATIVE SOIL
Commentary: ‘A Gold Rush Tears People Away From Their
Native Soil’. The ‘Gold Rush’ brings the temptation to chase the
promise of riches, wherever they may be. There have been many
‘Gold Rushes’ throughout history, and people often gamble their
resources and their sense of security to chase the possibility of
discovering treasures or rewards.
Oracle: The actual promise of abundance and fulfillment from
the ‘Gold Rush’ is only really available for a few, although this
depends very much on the ‘Gold’ that is being pursued. If the
‘Gold’ is worth the journey and the search, particularly on an
internal level, this could be a very rewarding journey that may
lead to a better life. Before you set out, you need to make sure you
have an adequate “map” of the new territory that you’re exploring.
The choice is often between an established, fairly stable situation
and an unstable, temporary or risky situation. You may indeed
strike ‘Gold’ or you may just find yourself exhausted and a long
way from home. Learning to discriminate just what is and what
is not possible will enhance your judgment of what’s worth
pursuing. Feelings of excitement and hysteria can be infectious
and you can find yourself heading off towards something that’s
not all it was cracked up to be. The desire to make easy money, to
“strike it rich”, or the grab for fame can easily overtake people if
ambitions get out of hand. Long term relationships may become
unpredictable and unstable when this Symbol is around, as one, or
possibly even both of you, are likely to run off for parts unknown
just when you seem to be settling into an everyday sense of life.
If you’re both after the same treasure, however, this can be an
incredibly exciting experience. Whatever the outcome, the trick
is to enjoy the journey.
Keywords: Strong desires to move on. The longing and the search
for the easy fulfillment of hopes and dreams. Leaving one’s native
soil. Having a cause or mission to pursue. Leaving home, people,
family. Dropping everything to chase a project. Pilgrimages. The
search for riches. Immigration and migration. Listening to clues.
The search for the Holy Grail. Pursuing a better life.
The Caution: Chasing the impossible dream. Losing everything.
Being unrealistic or opportunistic. Not being content with what
one’s got. The grass being greener elsewhere. Lusting after
rewards that may be unreal or transitory. Risking what one has
for what one could have. Wild goose chases.
Scorpio 6
Security is not the meaning of
my life.Great opportunities are
worth the risk.
Shirley Hufstedler
Gold will be slave or master.
Horace
Allthatisgolddoesnotglitter;
notallthosethatwanderarelost.
J.R.R.Tolkien
I kept on digging the hole
deeper and deeper looking for
the treasure chest until I finally
lifted my head,looked up and
realized that I had dug my own
grave.
Dominic—on the psychology
of a gambler
Although gold dust is precious,
when it gets in your eyes it
obstructs your vision.
Hsi-Tang
He is rich or poor according to
what he is,not according to
what he has.
HenryWard Beecher
Often the search proves more
profitable than the goal.
E.L.Konigsburg
Biggest profits mean gravest
risks.
Chinese Proverb
That glittering hope is
immemorial and beckons many
men to their undoing.
Euripides

<<<PAGE 240>>>
SCORPIO
P
217
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DEEP-SEA DIVERS WITH SPECIAL
MACHINERY
Commentary: ‘Deep-Sea Divers’ are shown. They have ‘Special
Machinery’ which enables them to plumb and explore the depths,
to see what they need to see, and to accomplish what they’ve set
out to achieve. One certainly has to be brave and courageous to be
a ‘Deep-Sea Diver’, with the skills to be able to survive in unknown,
unfamiliarandoftenriskyterritory.Withtheir‘Machinery’theyhave
the ability to scan, look at and investigate what’s usually not seen by
many. There has to be a strong level of trust in their own physical
andemotionalabilitiesandthattheir‘SpecialMachinery’willnotfail
them. ‘Deep-Sea Divers’ go where others fear to tread, and to places
that others wouldn’t even dream of going. Some people may think
the risks taken are foolish or that the journey into “the depths” is a
mere fantasy or a waste of time.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, you may need to get deep below
the surface to find out what’s really going on. It is down within
your subconscious and intuitive wisdom that you must search for
solutions. Letting go of the intellect and allowing yourself to take
a deep plunge into your inner self can reveal talents and wonders
that you may have only imagined were there. If you feel out of your
depth, there may be a sense of having no light to see what’s going
on or no oxygen for drawing a breath. You may feel a huge pressure
from the world you have dived into. If you are feeling overwhelmed
in some way, as if there’s the possibility of drowning at any moment,
imagine yourself being able to pierce through the darkness to see,
and take a deep breath. You can handle the pressure as long as you
are not pushing against it, or by changing your perceptions of that
pressure. A feeling of awe and wonder can sweep over you as you
realize you’re in new territory, with a new awareness and so much
promise. Remember, you have ‘Special Machinery’ which can help
you in this other world.
Keywords: Studying unconscious energies. Uncovering wonders.
Breath meditations and techniques. Plunging in. Seeing things that
others don’t. Having the special insights, talents or technology to
affect healings on deep levels. New levels of experience seen and
felt. Atlantis and Lemuria. Breathing apparatus. Getting “the bends”
and cramping up. Inner space. Highly tuned senses.
The Caution: Pretending to plumb the depths, but only for show.
Escapism. Going over the top emotionally. Being unreachable by
shuttingofftotheoutsideworld.Feelinggloomy.Nolight,nooxygen.
Losing touch with reality or the real world. Feeling like you’re in a
bubble. Isolation and dark thoughts. Not seeing the full picture.
Scorpio 7
Don’t you believe that there is in
man a deep so profound as to
be hidden even to him in whom
it is?
St.Augustine
Which is strongest – the reality
out of which the illusion is
created,the celluloid illusion
itself,or the need for illusion?
Do we hold the mirror up and
dive in? And if we do,what are
the consequences?
Marjorie Rosen
Throw a lucky man into the sea,
and he will come up with a fish
in his mouth.
Arabian Proverb
Sponges grow in the ocean.This
bothers me.How deep would it
be if they didn’t?
StevenWright
Working on navy sonar systems,
we knew that sound propagates
approximately four times
faster in water than in air.Now
here’s an interesting image.
When exploring the depths of
the seas — symbolic of soulful
emotions — acoustic images (as
in hearing) arrive four times as
fast.The suggestion is that with
seeking out the greater depths,
hearing,both audible and non-
audible,happens substantially
faster.Perceptual abilities
increase several fold.
Philip Sedgwick

<<<PAGE 241>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
218
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE SILVERY MOON SHINING
ACROSS A BEAUTIFUL GEM OF A
LAKE
Commentary: ‘The Silvery Moon Shining Across a Beautiful
Gem of a Lake’ is a romantic, reflective and beautiful image. It
evokes many emotional responses as we imagine the beauty of
the surrounding landscape and the stillness of the ‘Lake’. As this
is a ‘Beautiful Gem of a Lake’, its waters will be highly reflective
of the moonbeams that ‘Shine’ across it. The ‘Lake’ may convey
feelings of depth and the mysteries, or it could be so reflective
of the Moon’s beams that it seems to look like a mirror, having
no feeling of depth at all.
Oracle: In your situation, whether there is a feeling of hidden
depths or not, there may be a strong sense of things being
“reflected”. The image of the ‘Silvery Moon’ or a ‘Lake’ is very
much like that of a mirror. What is it about your situation that
may need more “reflection”? Is there a need to really take a
good, close look inside yourself or another? Or are things being
evaluated from a merely superficial level with everything being
a mere reflection of someone or something else? It may be wise
to remember that still waters run deep and things may not be
as they seem on the surface. This image can bring beauty into
your life and the need to remember the grace of nature. It’s an
opportunity to quietly reflect on the feminine aspects of your
life and feel the gentle warmth of the Goddess.
Keywords: Reflections. Mirrors. Things mystical and alluring.
The ‘Narcissus’ story. Picturesque scenes. Picture postcard
images. Peace and beauty. Halloween and magic. Escapism.
Placid emotions. Peace and quiet. Contemplation and meditation.
Having a reflective nature. Photographs. Psychic abilities.
Hypnotic charm or manipulation. Beaming faces. Projections
based on appearances. Beautiful landscapes. Stillness. Stairways
to heaven.
TheCaution: Acting out of moodiness. Losing the plot. Projecting
one’s self onto others. Narcissism. Looking at one’s self and others
as if in a mirror. Not wanting to see the whole picture. Being
superficial. A lack of depth. Seeing everything as a reflection
of one’s self. Relationships that have ideals that aren't based in
reality. Lack of everything. Codependent relationships. Superficial
responses.
Scorpio 8
We don’t see things as they are;
we see them as we are.
Anais Nin
A loving person lives in a loving
world.A hostile person lives in
a hostile world:Everyone you
meet is your mirror.
Ken Keyes Jr
A lake is the landscape’s most
beautiful and expressive feature.
It is earth’s eye;looking into
which the beholder measures
the depth of his own nature.
Henry DavidThoreau
There are some people who live
in a dream world,and there are
some who face reality;and then
there are those who turn one
into the other.
Douglas Everett
There is one art of which man
should be master;the art of
reflection.
Samuel Coleridge
LUNARIAN,n.An inhabitant of
the moon,as distinguished from
Lunatic,one whom the moon
inhabits.
Ambrose Bierce
Beauty is eternity gazing at itself
in the mirror.
Kahlil Gibran
Life is the mirror of king and
slave.
Madeline Bridges

<<<PAGE 242>>>
SCORPIO
P
219
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A DENTIST IS HARD AT WORK
Commentary: ‘A Dentist is Hard at Work’. His work involves
finding out what’s wrong in a situation and fixing it up so that
things can work smoothly and efficiently once again. Our
“chewing ability” is important as our teeth make it possible to
break down nourishment to its smaller elements or to a more
digestible consistency so that we can integrate these into our
wellbeing. He concentrates on fixing damage that has probably
occurred over a long period of time. The “patients” that the
‘Dentist Works’ on may be nervous and restless, and looking
forward to the whole thing being finished. Although he has a
very important or valuable job to do, many in society don’t fully
appreciate his ‘Work’.
Oracle: It is important to have healthy teeth as well as bodies and
minds. All these factors go into making up our wellbeing and they
need checks, balances and maintenance work done on a regular
basis to ensure smooth functioning. It is also important for us
to take responsibility for their efficient functioning to continue.
We need to make sure that we supply our bodies and minds
with good nourishment and hygiene, not just indulge in band-aid
treatments and cover-ups. ‘Dentists’, doctors and other physicians
are needed in society in order to fix up the problems that occur
in our lives. Society needs to invent a way of repairing the
somehow inevitable but probably largely unnecessary damage.
On another level, however, there are people who feel it is their
duty to continually point out where they think things need to be
“fixed”, and this can be painful in itself to endure. These people
sometimes need to know when to back off; we should be able to
assess and fix up our own mistakes. Whatever the situation, you
may need help at this time to cope with some of the difficulties
that might arise in this period e.g. finance, health, stress etc.
Keywords: Repairing damage. Drilling at something. Plugging
up situations. Being the responsible one who always has to fix
things. Not being able to relax. Causing pain to erase pain.
Tooth decay and bad breath. Medical equipment. Therapists.
Treatments. Social comment to invoke a cure. Flossing and oral
care. Attention to detail.
The Caution: Getting further into a hole by using more and more
social solutions. Causing more pollution and damage when one
should be honoring and fixing things. The fear of pain. Making
wrong judgments and causing harm. Big dentist bills because of
neglect. Always having to come up with solutions to problems.
Always being “on duty”. Nagging away at things.
Scorpio 9
It is very vulgar to talk like a
dentist when one isn’t a dentist.
It produces a false impression.
OscarWilde
Be true to your teeth and they
won’t be false to you.
Soupy Sales
The electric chair was invented
by a dentist!
Trivia.net
For there was never yet a
philosopher that could endure
the toothache patiently.
William Shakespeare
Dentist,n.:A Prestidigitator who,
putting metal in one’s mouth,
pulls coins out of one’s pockets.
Ambrose Bierce
The trouble with America is that
there are far too many wide-
open spaces surrounded by
teeth.
Charles Luckman
It is after you have lost your
teeth that you can afford to buy
steaks.
Pierre Auguste Renoir
The first thing I do in the
morning is brush my teeth and
sharpen my tongue.
Oscar Levant
The tooth fairy teaches children
that they can sell body parts for
money.
David Richerby

<<<PAGE 243>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
220
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FELLOWSHIP SUPPER REUNITES
OLD COMRADES
Commentary: ‘A Fellowship Supper Reunites Old Comrades’.
Circumstances have bought people together and they are sharing
‘Supper’ whilst reliving old memories. Getting together with
people with shared visions or history can be very rewarding
and renewing. Stories from the past come up, old friendships
are remembered and memories are jogged. This can point to
a get together or a meeting, perhaps over dinner, and finding
a special bond between people that feels like it stretches way
back into history.
Oracle: In the situation facing you there is a chance to eat, drink
and be merry with ‘Old Comrades’. Reunions and gatherings of
people who haven’t seen each other for a long time can be very
rewarding and can remind you of cherished days long gone.
Stories from each one's past can be brought up as well as sharing
present time realities. This Symbol can also indicate the feeling
of having met or having known someone before, even if they
haven’t literally met each other previously. That this ‘Supper
Reunites Old Comrades’ shows there can be the sense that you’ve
somehow shared past life experiences. Feelings or realizations
of togetherness can come from “breaking bread”, drinking and
socializing with others. These feelings can be very strong and
can bring up all sorts of reactions and emotions. True friendship
and fraternity are likely to result from this meeting and bring
a sweet sense of nostalgia. If there’s a situation where you feel
alienated from someone you’d like to reconnect with, try sharing
a meal and see how this “breaks the ice”. There may be some old
issues that need to be worked through. Have you been avoiding
socializing with like-minded people lately?
Keywords: Renewing bonds with those you’ve shared struggles
with. Past life connections. Feeling like you’ve known someone
for lifetimes. Reaching out to others. Having a million and one
things to talk about. Reunions and memories. Talking about the
past. Sharing meals. Drinking wine. The Last Supper. Partaking
in the gifts of special relationships. Fated meetings.
The Caution: Only feeling comfortable with the past. Resisting
joining with others. Feeling like a loner, with no one to share
the good things in life. Being uneasy about having to face old
comrades or adversaries. Secrets being revealed. Gossip that
belittles others. Breaking the ice.
Scorpio 10
Friendships develop over food
and wine.
Prince Nicholas Romanoff
With true friends ...even water
drunk together is sweet enough.
Chinese Proverb
If Jesus Christ were to come
today,people would not crucify
him.They would ask him to
dinner,and hear what he had
to say,and make fun of it.
Thomas Carlyle
Strange to see how a good
dinner and feasting reconciles
everybody.
Samuel Pepys
Every parting is a form of death,
as every reunion is a type of
heaven.
Tryon Edwards
Man cannot live by bread alone.
Romanian Proverb
We look like a road company of
the Last Supper.
Dorothy Parker
Madam,I have been looking
for a person who disliked gravy
all my life;let us swear eternal
friendship.
Rev.Sydney Smith
Better fare hard with good men
than feast it with bad.
Thomas Paine

<<<PAGE 244>>>
SCORPIO
P
221
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A DROWNING MAN IS BEING
RESCUED
Commentary: ‘A Drowning Man is Being Rescued’ is a symbol
of difficulties, relief, rescue and resuscitation. The ‘Drowning
Man’ often indicates someone who’s fallen into something that
is out of his or her control and out of their depth. They can feel
like they’re being overpowered by their inability to cope with
life. This can manifest on any level, emotionally, physically or
spiritually. Here, he is shown as ‘Being Rescued’, and help is, or
soon will be, nearby.
Oracle: We can feel like we are suffocated by our marriage, job,
friendships, life path, etc., or through the lack of these things.
Although this Symbol speaks of a ‘Rescuing’, and this may
indeed be at hand, sometimes it’s essential that we admit to the
fact that we are losing control or ‘Drowning’ before a ‘Rescue’
can even begin to take place. People will often lend a hand
and spontaneously arrive on the scene to help others out, but
they need to know the depths of the situation that’s occurring.
As the ‘Man’ in this Symbol is ‘Being Rescued’, it shows that
the ‘Drowning’ has been noticed and that ‘Rescue’ or relief is
imminent. People may indeed turn up to help out or this may
be a more lonely passage, with you having to rely on yourself.
However, continuing to struggle on alone may not solve anything
– indeed, struggling can make things worse. This Symbol can also
point to co-dependent types of relationships where there is a
continual need to be available, to be on hand, and to be reliable.
This can be a tiring responsibility for the ‘Rescuer’ as well as
for the ‘Drowning’ person. A true ‘Rescue’ is often found when
we look after our own needs, even if it entails a hand-up from
someone else along the way. Concentrate on the shore, even if it
feels as though it’s miles away from you. Reconnect with what’s
possible and real, earth yourself and know that help is at hand,
even if it’s your higher self that is performing the ‘Rescue’. Soon
you’ll be able to “breathe” easily again.
Keywords: Resuscitation. Regaining one’s breath. Finding life
renewed. Asthma, bronchitis, breathing difficulties. Finding help
in moments of crisis. Needing a hand. Being rescued. Salvation on
anylevel.Ventilators.Breathingequipment.Oxygen.Dependence.
Last minute reprieves. Born again experiences. Help.
TheCaution: Panicking in order to draw help rather than learning
how to cope. Constantly finding reasons for losing control of
situations. Getting into deep water on a regular basis.
Scorpio 11
The salvation of the world
consists in the salvation of the
individual soul.
C.G.Jung
Eachman’staskishislifepreserver.
George B.Emerson
The drowning man will clutch
at a straw.
Proverb
Anxiety is love’s greatest killer.
It makes one feel as you might
when a drowning person
holds on to you.You want to
save him,but you know he will
strangle you in his panic.
Anais Nin
You don’t drown by falling in
the water;you drown by staying
there.
Edwin Louis Cole
If a man is destined to drown,
he will drown even in a
spoonful of water.
Yiddish Proverb
As long as you keep a person
down,some part of you has
to be down there to hold him
down,so it means you cannot
soar as you otherwise might.
Marian Anderson
Nobody heard him,the dead
man,but still he lay moaning:I
was much further out than you
thought,and not waving but
drowning.
Stevie Smith

<<<PAGE 245>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
222
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BRILLIANT ASSEMBLY OF
DIGNITARIES AT AN OFFICIAL
EMBASSY BALL
Commentary: ‘A Brilliant Assembly of Dignitaries’ is shown at an
‘Official Embassy Ball’. Everyone is expected to be dressed-up, have
good manners and follow certain established codes of behavior. As
it is a ‘Brilliant Assembly of Dignitaries’, we can be sure that some
of the people have worked long and hard at getting themselves into
a position of power and prestige. They must really be “someone” in
order to be invited. If they weren’t special in some way – powerful,
political, influential or somehow well connected, they probably
wouldn’t be at the ‘Ball’. Those that are invited range from the jaded
consulate of some country who’s tired of the social whirl all the
way down to someone who’s “on their way up”. The younger and
possibly more naive are probably excited about participating in the
splendorandfinery.Tobeinvitedtothe‘OfficialEmbassyBall’isquite
important or special to some, whilst others will take it for granted.
Others wouldn’t care to go if their life depended on it because of the
perceived stuffiness and formality of the occasion.
Oracle: This Symbol speaks of a pleasant, almost party-like
atmosphere, but one that is often caged in somewhat strict protocol
andrulesofbehavior.Therulesandmannersofsocietycanberather
limiting,butthereareoftengoodreasonsforthem.Withoutcodesof
ethicsandmanners,societies,businessdealingsandrelationshipscan
fall apart. Look at yourself and observe whether you are being true
to your sense of self. Do you have to put on a false show in order to
belong? Do you have to put on “airs” and impress people in order to
beaccepted?Wouldyouratherbeinalessformalatmosphere?Listen
and learn from those around you, interesting and useful information
can come to light. Put on your best face and behavior as connections
with “the right people” can be made.
Keywords: Political game playing. Manners and protocol. Dressing
and looking right. Who knows who and what it’s worth. Social and
politicalstanding.TheCinderellastory.Sparklingoccasions.Knowing
etiquette. Looking for social connections and outcomes that are not
necessarily immediate. International relations. The “My Fair Lady”
story. Social engineering. Speaking the right language.
The Caution: The habit of role-playing. Not being taught how to
behavein“politesociety”.Havingtolearnhowtofitinwithouthaving
instruction. Dining, drinking and enjoying life whilst others can “eat
cake”.Diplomaticstandoffs.Gatecrashing.Feelingoutofone’sdepth.
Political point scoring that ignores the human dimension.
Scorpio 12
You can get through life with
bad manners,but it’s easier
with good manners.
Lillian Gish
Politeness:The most acceptable
hypocrisy.
Ambrose Bierce
Etiquette can be at the same
time a means of approaching
people and of staying clear of
them.
David Riesman
You can’t be truly rude until you
understand good manners.
Rita Mae Brown
Never speak disrespectfully of
Society.Only people who can’t
get into it do that.
OscarWilde
It is sometimes necessary to lie
damnably in the interests of the
nation.
Hilaire Belloc
It is very vulgar to talk about
one’s business.Only people like
stockbrokers do that,and then
merely at dinner parties.
OscarWilde
The true definition of a snob
is one who craves for what
separates men rather than for
what unites them.
John Buchan

<<<PAGE 246>>>
SCORPIO
P
223
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INVENTOR PERFORMS A
LABORATORY EXPERIMENT
Commentary: ‘An Inventor’ is seen ‘Performing a Laboratory
Experiment’. It’s hard to know from this Symbol whether he is
alone or working with others. Regardless of the circumstances,
he has to take responsibility for the outcome. The ‘Inventor’ has
to imagine what is possible, gather the necessary ingredients and
be willing to take a risk on whether things will work out or not.
His ‘Experiment’ may prove to be successful, scary or downright
dangerous and risky. If the ‘Inventor’ is doing something new
and untried, he must be prepared to step out into unknown
territory, and be prepared for the whole thing to blow up in his
face. However, ‘Experiments’ don't really fail; although he may
have to start all over again with a new set of plans, something
is always gained.
Oracle: If things are not working at the moment you probably need
to ‘Experiment’, trying different combinations and possibilities.
In doing so you will not only most likely find the solution to the
situation, but you will also learn a lot from any errors that are
made along the way. Look for creative solutions to the situation
facing you. A lot of amazing discoveries can be made simply by
having a go at something or creating the right mix of ingredients.
As the situation unfolds, you’ll learn clues as to what should be
the next thing to do, the tasks that are worth performing or the
risks that you are prepared to take. Be prepared to be inventive
and make things up as you go along. Sometimes we have to just
“go for it” and do what we feel needs to be done without knowing
what the outcome is going to be. Take a few calculated risks and
along the way you just might discover something unexpected.
Keywords: Creating one’s vision. Thinking quickly and making
momentary decisions. Being prepared to risk failure. Bringing
different mixes of things and/or people together. Taking
calculated risks to see what will happen. Seeing if things live
up to expectations. Looking for answers. The “mad professor”.
Mixing chemicals. Measuring and weighing. Going by one’s gut
reactions. Inventions and experiments. Discovery. Laboratories.
Research.
The Caution: Becoming obscured by pointless goals. Making
things up. Being one-eyed and focused to the exclusion of all
else. Not fully understanding the consequences of actions.
Always taking risks. Not taking adequate cautions. Not keeping
track of what you’re doing. Ignoring warning signs. Being a “mad
professor”.
Scorpio 13
Westheimer’s Discovery:
A couple of months in the
laboratory can frequently save
a couple of hours in the library.
Anon
Discovery is seeing what
everyone else has seen and
thinking what no one else has
thought.
Albert von Szent-Gyorgi
Science is the tool of the
Western mind and with it more
doors can be opened than with
bare hands.It is part and parcel
of our knowledge and obscures
our insight only when it holds
that the understanding given
by it is the only kind there is.
C.G.Jung
If you shoot for the stars and hit
the moon,it’s OK.But you’ve got
to shoot for something.A lot of
people don’t even shoot.
RobertTownsend
Name the greatest of all the
inventors.Accident.
MarkTwain
Attempt the end and never
stand to doubt;nothing's so
hard,but search will find it out.
Robert Herrick
The man who makes no
mistakes does not usually make
anything.
Edward J.Phelps

<<<PAGE 247>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
224
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TELEPHONE LINEMEN AT WORK
INSTALLING NEW CONNECTIONS
Commentary: ‘Telephone Linemen at Work Installing New
Connections’ shows people working and concentrating on laying
the ‘Lines’ for ‘Connections’ so that people may communicate
with each other easily and effectively. They are laying cables
to allow for the smooth functioning of the ‘Telephone’ system.
They have a clear understanding of how the equipment works
and how necessary and valuable it is to enable people to link up
with each other.
Oracle: This Symbol reflects an increase in the forms of
communication that you can have access to, or that you have
more communications coming to you. You may find that there has
been a failure in communicating your thoughts, ideas or emotions
lately. Something is being (or needs to be) done or laid down, in
order to solve, repair or patch up the situation. There is nothing
to be achieved by worrying about any recent “connection”
failures, however something should be done to set about making
or repairing the necessary ‘Lines’ of communication. Sometimes
advice and help must be called on for all to be resolved. This may
need to be expert advice, but it can also be gathered from your
own common sense. This can symbolize expansion into areas
like the Internet, faxes or business lines. It can also represent
the spiritual connection to the “other side”, even channeling.
Sometimes, however, in the ‘Installing of New Connections’
problems of crossed-lines occur. It’s important to listen for the
real truth in the communications that are being made, not to all
the faint chitchat that surrounds what’s being said. Networking
and new lines of communications often open up after this Symbol
is revealed.
Keywords: Acupuncture and other therapies that work on the
body’s meridians. The nervous system. The Internet. Forming
new lines of communication. New connections taking place.
Linking people up. Making sure that messages get through. Mobile
phones, faxes, email. Networks and networking. Switchboards.
Satellites. Wires. The ability to reach far distances. Getting on
other peoples’ wavelengths. Contacts. Hooking up with the
system. UFO experiences. Mobile phones.
The Caution: Failing to see the necessity for repairs to personal
communication. Becoming involved in other people’s lives.
Gossip. News, thoughts and ideas spreading rapidly and getting
out of control. Constant chatting. Being fickle. Sabotage. Engaged
signals.
Scorpio 14
If the first person who answers
the phone cannot answer your
question it’s a bureaucracy.If
the first person can answer your
question,it’s a miracle.
Gerald F.Lieberman
That’s an amazing invention
[the telephone],but who would
ever want to use one of them?
Rutherford B.Hayes (US
president)
My kids’idea of a hard life is to
live in a house with only one
phone.
George Foreman
Well if this is the wrong number,
why did you answer it?
JamesThurber
In the business world an
executive knows something
about everything,a technician
knows everything about
something—and the
switchboard operator knows
everything.
Harold Coffin
Gossip is nature’s telephone.
Sholom Aleichem
I’ve suffered from all of the
hang-ups known,and none is as
bad as the telephone.
Richard Armour
Middle age is when you’re sitting
at home on Saturday night and
the telephone rings and you
hope it isn’t for you.
Ogden Nash

<<<PAGE 248>>>
SCORPIO
P
225
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CHILDREN PLAYING AROUND FIVE
MOUNDS OF SAND
Commentary: ‘Children Playing Around Five Mounds of Sand’
shows ‘Children’ playing, enjoying themselves and each other
in a safe, natural setting. The ‘Five Mounds’ often represents the
pentacle, or pentagram. A pentacle is a five-pointed star, often
held to have magical or mystical significance. It is a symbol often
associated with and used in Wicca and pagan rites. The ‘Sand’
is symbolic of impermanence; it can disperse over time, leaving
only a passing impression. The ‘Children’ symbolize innocence
and, in this case, almost a lack of awareness of the more serious
or crucial factors in their lives. Here the ‘Children Play’ in and
around the pentacle with little consideration of whether there
may be some other deeper or ritualistic purpose.
Oracle: You may feel that you have the potential for greater things,
but don’t understand what they are. Development takes time and
it is the first experience of ‘Playing’ with latent talent that leads to
greater knowledge. You will be able to fulfill your potential, but
maybe you need to start at the beginning. Nowadays, the true art
of ‘Play’ has largely been lost. We have the apparent need for more
and more complicated machinery and gadgets in order to bring
joy. Much can be learnt from letting go and allowing yourself to
experience joy naturally found in the company of others. Indeed,
if ‘Playing’ is seen as sacred and special, it can be particularly
healing. Things such as walking in the desert, doing sweat lodges,
and enjoying spiritual gatherings with others. Interacting with
others brings our “humanness” to life. It will be necessary to be
conscious of their needs, as some may get ‘lost’ in this situation,
losing sight of the others as they disappear behind the ‘Mounds of
Sand’. Taking things lightheartedly and enjoying the company of
other people, particularly those that are creative and intelligent,
can move this situation forward.
Keywords: Creative integration of new ideals. Five being the
number of mankind. The value of play in getting to know one
another. Playgrounds. Crop circles. The desert. Throwing caution
to the wind. Playing ‘hide and go seek’. Shifting sands. Rituals.
American Indian rites. The love of the physical world. The five
senses. Carefree and happy playgrounds and laughter. Pentacles.
Witchcraft. Solomon's Seal.
The Caution: Being too serious to see life’s lighthearted side.
Mourning or regretting over childhood lost. The inability to take
life seriously. Brooding and hiding.
Scorpio 15
If you never did,you should.
These things are fun,and fun is
good.
Dr.Seuss
We must teach our children to
dream with their eyes open.
Harry Edwards
The only moral lesson which
is suited for a child,the most
important lesson for every
time of life,is this:“Never hurt
anybody.”
Denis Breeze
There are children playing in
the street who could solve some
of my top problems in physics,
because they have modes of
sensory perception that I lost
long ago.
Julius Robert Oppenheimer
The soul is healed by being with
children.
Fyodor Dostoevsky
The world is your playground.
Why aren’t you playing?
Ellie Katz
And on her head,lest spirits
should invade,a pentacle,for
more assurance,laid.
Orlando Furioso
Young fellows will be young
fellows.
Isaac Bickerstaff

<<<PAGE 249>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
226
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GIRL’S FACE BREAKING INTO A
SMILE
Commentary:‘AGirl’sFace’isshown‘BreakingintoaSmile’.Shemay
have been facing a dilemma, or seriously contemplating something.
Now, there has been a breakthrough, and her ‘Face Breaks Into
a Smile’. By the mere change of her facial expression, her whole
demeanor has shifted. We ‘Break Into a Smile’ when we choose to
invite others to come closer to us. If we can’t see another’s ‘Face’, we
make all kinds of assumptions about what’s going on in their minds
– most often the wrong kind – often based on our own mindset.
Road rage and email misunderstandings happen because we’re not
able to read each other’s ‘Faces’. People bumping into each other in
the street when walking don’t become nearly as enraged as they do
when they are driving cars. This is largely because people exchange
looks of apology and forgiveness, and all is forgiven or forgotten.
Oracle: There may be a need to lighten up. ‘Smiling’ not only makes
us feel better, it makes others feel good as well. As happiness boosts
the immune system, things are bound to turn around through
showing a positive attitude. Many things can be gained through
‘Smiling’, including getting your own way. There’s the ‘Smile’ we
have when we’re genuinely happy, or the ‘Smile’ we have when the
“penny drops” and something is realized or understood. A ‘Smile’
may show a quiet, inner knowing, such as when you know more
than what is being said or when you have an intuitive sense of what
someone really means. True ‘Smiling’ can be infectious, with others
responding in the same way. If you are inviting a relationship, or
trying to heal one, ‘A Smile’ can be a great icebreaker. Others want
to see you happy, calm, accepting or welcoming. In this context the
‘Smile’ is a response to others and shows evidence of your empathy
and desire to find a positive, warm, friendly outcome. Try doing it
more and see how you feel.
Keywords: Breaking the ice. Drawing others. Radiating happiness.
Facial expressions. Changing one’s expression or demeanor. Facial
feedback. Making positive eye contact. Transferring feelings that lift
others.Releasingstress,worryandanger.Distancesbridgedbetween
people. Being face-to-face. Teeth, lips, gums, dimples, eyes. Facial
lines. Dental work. Beauty that radiates.
The Caution: False happiness to satisfy others’ needs. Covering up
how one’s really feeling through putting on a show of happiness.
Lack of sincerity. Rigidity of responses. Sour faces. Feeling sad and
lonely. Keeping people on the sidelines and the periphery of one’s
life. Grumpy attitudes. Refusal to communicate.
Scorpio 16
One should have a general
attitude of welcoming to
everybody.
Bertrand Russell
Enthusiasm…the sustaining
power of all great action.
Samuel Smiles
Smile at each other,smile
at your wife,smile at your
husband,smile at your children,
smile at each other – it doesn’t
matter who it is – and that will
help you to grow up in greater
love for each other.
MotherTeresa
Beauty is power;a smile is its
sword.
Charles Reade
Your day will go the way the
corners of your mouth turn.
Proverb
Flattery is from the teeth out.
Sincere appreciation is from the
heart out.
Dale Carnegie
Fake it,fake it until you make it
(until you laugh).
Anon
Most folks are as happy as they
make their minds up to be.
Abraham Lincoln
A tender smile,
our sorrows' only balm.
EdwardYoung

<<<PAGE 250>>>
SCORPIO
P
227
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN,FILLED WITH HER OWN
SPIRIT,IS THE FATHER OF HER OWN
CHILD
Commentary: ‘A Woman, Filled With Her Own Spirit, is the
Father of Her Own Child’. She radiates a sense of certainty and
self-sufficiency about who she is. There is the feeling that she
could accomplish almost anything, as she is ‘Filled With Her Own
Spirit’. This Symbol indicates the ability one has to be able to cope
with being on their own, looking after the details of life without
another’s help. The 'Woman' can look after the everyday needs
of her own life along with those of her family.
Oracle: This situation may reveal the sense or the reality that you
need to be totally self-sufficient at the moment, regardless of those
around you and their input into your life. Alternatively, there can
be the feeling of having been “left with the baby”. It can indicate
single parenthood or bringing up the young without outside
help. This Symbol can indicate the loss of the males in one’s life,
such as the husband or father. However, it can also indicate the
feeling that one’s life is full enough as it is and the path ahead
doesn’t seem to include the desire or the need to have children.
Be wary of isolationist and prohibitive emotions, though. Is there
a situation here where others are not being invited to share or
be included in your life? How are you coping with the more
complicated tasks and chores that you have to get on with in
life? Try to remember to include others respectfully, however.
Although we are all blessed with our own unique and individual
qualities, it is often the combination of ourselves with others that
helps to create greater balance and depth in life. Confidence in
the future and ‘Filling’ yourself up ‘With Your Own Spirit’ can
lead to wonderful possibilities. Creative projects can be birthed
more fully when one has an infinite and total connection with
what one wants to produce.
Keywords: Single parenthood. Being proud of one’s individuality.
Feeling capable of anything. Spiritual experiences that fill one
with one’s own spirit. Self-reliance. The lack of a father figure.
Invitro fertilization. The complications of adoption. Self-
sufficiency. Facing the world feeling whole. Having the right to
determine one’s future. The story of the conception of Jesus.
The Caution: Uncompromising feminism or chauvinism.
Feeling like one has to be responsible for everything. Unrealistic
independence. Being left alone and abandoned. Having no one to
turn to for support. Being an adult before one’s time.
Scorpio 17
I don’t need anyone to rectify
my existence.The most
profound relationship we
will ever have is the one with
ourselves.
Shirley MacLaine
The consuming desire of most
human beings is deliberately
to plant their whole life in the
hands of some other person.
Quentin Crisp
At work,you think of the
children you have left at home.
At home,you think of the work
you’ve left unfinished.Such a
struggle is unleashed within
yourself.Your heart is rent.
Golda Meir
One of the most obvious facts
about grownups to a child is
that they have forgotten what
it is like to be a child.
Randall Jarrell
It is easier for a father to have
children than for children to
have a real father.
Pope John XXIII
If one is not going to take
the necessary precautions to
avoid having parents one must
undertake to bring them up.
Quentin Crisp

<<<PAGE 251>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
228
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A QUIET PATH THROUGH WOODS
BRILLIANT IN AUTUMN COLORING
Commentary: ‘A Quiet Path Through Woods Brilliant in Autumn
Coloring’. The ‘Quiet Path’ is the ‘Path’ that one should (or
perhaps must) take, in order to finish something or accomplish
some mission. The ‘Autumn’ leaves are a symbol of change
– the energy of the recent growth is returned to the earth in
preparation for the next growing season. There is a feeling of
transition as the leaves decay into the vegetation. Quiet walks
can reconnect one with nature.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, fruitful success is now behind
you. It is the dramatic preparation for change that has resulted
from the fruits of your labor that surrounds you now. It is now
either on (or just after) harvest time and everything is changing.
Take a deep breath and infuse yourself with nature’s gifts. This
Symbol can also represent the opportunity to consider and reflect
on the success of your recent activities. If there hasn’t been
enough success or productivity there is nothing more that can
be done for the time being as the “season for harvest” has now
finished. Winter is coming and with it the need to recuperate and
restore energy. It is time to let the past go and prepare for making
new plans. Whether your “harvest” has been successful or not,
there will be many lessons and benefits from what has occurred.
This Symbol is about the opportunity and maybe even the need
to take time to quietly appreciate this shift of energy.
Keywords: Rewards of plenty. Transformations through
the different seasons of one’s life. Overcoming battles and
disappointments. Finding peace. Layers of personality issues
flaking off with maturity. Gardens, sometimes off the beaten
track. Taking time out to reflect on nature. The feeling of change
in the air. Mature and elegant responses. Rich colors. Memories
and memoirs. Taking life one day at a time. Overcoming loss
through positive attitudes. Warm responses. A calm knowingness.
Reverence and respect. Having a "been there, done that"
attitude.
TheCaution: Being too late for the harvest. Concentrating on the
past. Being oblivious to nature’s beauty. Resisting the flow of the
seasons. Feeling that winter is upon you with no way out. Issues
of growing old. Being alone in one's "autumn years".
Scorpio 18
Unless a tree has borne
blossoms in spring,you will
vainly look for fruit on it in
autumn.
Charles Hare
The clearest way into the
Universe is through a forest
wilderness.
John Muir
How did it get so late so soon?
It’s night before it’s afternoon.
December is here before it’s
June.My goodness how the
time has flewn.How did it get
so late so soon?
Dr.Seuss
Two roads diverged in a woods,
and I took the one less traveled
by,and that has made all the
difference.
Robert Frost
How beautifully leaves grow
old.How full of light and color
are their last days.
John Burroughs
So many gods,so many creeds,
So many paths that wind and
wind,While just the art of being
kind is all the sad world needs.
EllaWheelerWilcox
Ah!Well away!
Seasons flower and fade.
Lord AlfredTennyson

<<<PAGE 252>>>
SCORPIO
P
229
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PARROT LISTENING AND THEN
TALKING,REPEATS A CONVERSATION
HE HAS OVERHEARD
Commentary: ‘A Parrot’ is shown ‘Listening and Then Talking’.
He ‘Repeats a Conversation He Has Overheard’. The ‘Parrot’ has
the ability to mimic what’s being said and the various sounds
that surround him. In esoteric symbolism, birds often symbolize
spiritual forces.
Oracle: This Symbol often infers some level of spiritual
channeling, as thoughts and words can sometimes appear to
course through a person, especially if the “messages” seem
to come from somewhere else. It can show someone who is
receptive to the thoughts and ideas that are around, or in the
environment, and can process the information to the point
where it becomes their own. The ability to convey the facts or a
message accurately and responsibly will be very important to the
outcome. However, there is a need for caution with this Symbol.
It can imply messages, talk or gossip that loses its integrity once
it reaches someone who operates on an unconscious level.
Translating things into different languages or repeating them
can lead to things being either more understood or less. One
needs to be accurate about what was actually said, and what
was meant, before any misunderstandings take place. Look to
the source of the information in this situation; is it reliable and
was the original message understood in its entirety? Is this a
“conscious” retelling of the story? Is what’s being said coming
from the heart, or is it really not worth listening to? Also, this
Symbol can show someone who expects instructions or orders
to be followed without question.
Keywords: Transmitting information or knowledge. The need
to integrate things into consciousness. Recorded messages.
Answering and fax machines. Mumbling. Translators, birds,
parrots, news reporters, stool pigeons. Telephone operators.
Messages from strange places. Automated responses. New
languages. Talking to animals. Talkback radio.
The Caution: Rote responses that are ill considered. “Towing
the party line” without having any opinion of your own. Going
over the same territory. Losing true meaning through repetition.
Repeating without knowing the real meaning or purpose.
Meaningless banter. Tunnel vision. Gossiping. Missing the
essence of what’s being said. Not having a mind of one’s own.
Brainwashing. Re-runs of the same old line. Broken records.
Scorpio 19
Sometimes they write what
I say and not what I mean.
Baseball player Pedro
Guerrero on reporters
INTERPRETER,n.One who
enables two persons of different
languages to understand each
other by repeating to each
other what it would have been
to the interpreter’s advantage
for the other to have said.
Ambrose Biere
Accept your genius and say
what you think.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Youhavetherighttoremain
silent.Anythingyousaywillbe
misquotedthenusedagainstyou.
Anon
Whenyoutalk,yourepeatwhat
youalreadyknow;whenyou
listen,youoftenlearnsomething.
Jared Sparks
The real menace in dealing with
a five-year-old is that in no time
at all you begin to sound like a
five-year-old.
Jean Kerr
Children seldom misquote you.
In fact,they usually repeat word
for word what you shouldn’t
have said.
Anon
The best time to hold your
tongue is the time you feel you
must say something or bust.
Josh Billings

<<<PAGE 253>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
230
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN DRAWING ASIDE TWO
DARK CURTAINS THAT CLOSED THE
ENTRANCE TO A SACRED PATHWAY
Commentary: ‘A Woman’ is ‘Drawing Aside Two Dark Curtains
That Closed the Entrance to a Sacred Pathway’. She is revealing
a way forward, a ‘Pathway’ that has previously been closed
off or completely unknown or unexplored. Perhaps she has
just discovered this ‘Sacred Pathway’ herself, or she could be
revealing it for others so that they may explore new realms for
themselves. ‘Drawing Aside the Dark Curtains’ can allow light
to flood ‘Dark’ corners.
Oracle: You may sense the need to venture down new ‘Pathways’
ortoinvestigatenewpossibilities.Youwillhavetomusterintuitive
faith and overcome any fears in order to truly enter into these
new realms. Having or showing courage, being inquisitive and
expressing strong desires may also be prerequisites for success in
this new arena of experience. Your sphere of action and operation
are likely to become vastly enlarged with the new perspectives
that are opening up to you. All sorts of new possibilities and
opportunities are before you. These can be felt on the physical
level, on the more mystical planes, or in a sexual way. “Pulling
back the curtains” to reveal what needs to be shown will lead
to answers to this question. Look at your situation, what exactly
is this ‘Sacred Pathway’ and where is it leading you? Is it a place
that has been dreamt about for some time, but until now there
hasn’t been a guide or a traveling companion to show the way
or to share the journey? Whatever the case may be, it appears
that help will soon be at hand in sorting out the mystery that
stands before you. Be receptive, be loving and take the step into
the unknown.
Keywords: Mysteries revealed, sometimes after a long wait.
Feminine mysteries laid out before you. Woman’s reproductive
organs, especially the vagina. The mysteries of the Goddesses.
Getting past things that are cloaked or shielded from entry or
view. Sexual mysteries. Open Sesame. Clairvoyant readings that
reveal the ‘Path’. Invitations to the unknown. Drawing aside
inhibitions. Following through on things. Undressing.
The Caution: Being seduced into dark and sinister things or
being led astray. Not being shown the true picture or the truth.
Frigidity and closing off sexual responses. Being, or feeling, shut
out. Dark rooms with little sign of life.
Scorpio 20
All is mystery;but he is a
slave who will not struggle
to penetrate the dark veil.
Benjamin Disraeli
Blow the dust off the clock.Your
watches are behind the times.
Throw open the heavy curtains
which are so dear to you-you do
not even suspect that the day
has already dawned outside.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn
Who’s not sat tense before his
own heart’s curtain?
Rainer Maria Rilke
The first step toward change is
awareness.The second step is
acceptance.
Nathaniel Branden
Of what use is the veil if you are
going to dance?
Hindu Proverb
Happiness is nothing but
everyday living seen through
a veil.
Zora Neale Hurston
There was a door to which I
found no key:There was the veil
through which I might not see.
Omar Khayyam
Dance me through the curtains
that our kisses have outworn.
Leonard Cohen

<<<PAGE 254>>>
SCORPIO
P
231
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
OBEYING HIS CONSCIENCE,A
SOLDIER RESISTS ORDERS
Commentary: ‘Obeying His Conscience, a Solder Resists Orders’
is an image of someone coming to terms with the fact that he can’t
perform the duty that is expected of him because it goes against
the grain of who he truly is, what he truly stands for and what
it is that he wants out of life. He needs to ‘Obey His Conscience’
and ‘Resist Orders’. Doing things that go against the very fabric
of his being may mean he may never be able to live with himself.
Indeed, he may have to go AWOL and completely leave what he’s
been expected or, indeed, trained to do.
Oracle: We sometimes find that society has drawn up rules and
regulations to live by that are inappropriate for our inner world.
When this happens, we find ourselves compromised if we are
expected to follow through or act on them. This Symbol speaks
of the need to occasionally ‘Disobey’ the structures of society
and what is expected. You may find yourself in a situation where
expectations put on you go directly against your values. There is
often the difficult choice between allegiance (to a relationship, a
job, a country, etc) and your own inner beliefs, truths, objectives
and ambitions. True freedom can only be found within when
one faces these situations with a sense of integrity and a full
understanding of the consequences that are possible. Are you
aware of and prepared for any consequences that may come
from a refusal to comply or conform to what others want? What
“punishments” may come from refusing to ‘Obey Orders’? What
are the ‘Orders’, who makes them and who is responsible for
them when they’re carried out? There can be confusion around
relationships, resulting in difficulties in following what society
says should be done. Is it a longing for a return to a pure state
of love that freezes you? Are you prepared to stand your ground
and uphold your values?
Keywords: Personal morality. Doing what one’s conscience
dictates. Going against the status quo. Doing the unexpected.
Going by the promptings of the inner voice. The consequences
of having a conscience. Not coming home. People clinging to
each other. Love that restrains.
The Caution: Displaying cowardice or a lack of courage to act.
Not doing what one is expected to do. ‘Going over the top’ in
a wild and crazy way. Going AWOL. Being the one who lets
everyone down. Court Martials. Antisocial behavior. Anarchists.
Being “uncommitted” or “unavailable”. Choosing play instead of
duty. Goofing off.
Scorpio 21
A man must consider what rich
realm he abdicates when he
becomes a conformist.
RalphWaldo Emerson
I’ve been trying for some time to
develop a lifestyle that doesn’t
require my presence.
GaryTrudeau
He who learns and runs away,
lives to learn another day.
Edward LeeThorndike
I was court-martialed in my
absence,and sentenced to death
in my absence,so I said they
could shoot me in my absence.
Brendan F.Behan
So daily I renew my duty;I
touch her here and there,I know
my place;I kiss her open mouth,
I praise her beauty and people
call me traitor to my face.
Leonard Cohen
Theirs is not to reason why.
Theirs is but to do or die.
Lord AlfredTennyson
I had examined myself pretty
thoroughly and discovered that
I was unfit for military service.
Joseph Heller-Catch 22
The first duty of a soldier is
obedience.
G.J.Whyte-Melville
A guilty conscience needs no
accuser.
Chaucer

<<<PAGE 255>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
232
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
HUNTERS PROTECTED BY HEAVY
CLOTHING ARE SHOOTING WILD DUCKS
Commentary: ‘Hunters Protected by Heavy Clothing are
Shooting Wild Ducks’ is an image that brings to mind people
taking unfair advantage of smaller beings. The ‘Hunters' 'Heavy
Clothing’ implies that they are wearing camouflage in order to
hide from the ‘Ducks’, or they are somehow protected by their
“garb” as they are ‘Hunting’ their prey. This ‘Protective Clothing’
can make their prey an easy target. If the ‘Hunters’ are ‘Shooting
Wild Ducks’ in order to make a living or to be able to eat, then
the ‘Shooting’ seems to be more justified, or acceptable, than if
they are just doing it for sport.
Oracle: Sometimes there is the need for an outlet for aggressive
emotions.Doingsoingroupsgivesthissomesenseofacceptability,
but is it ever really socially acceptable? If there is a clear cut
reason for this “shooting party”, such as survival or food, this
action may be seen as a necessary part of life. However, this often
shows innocent people or those not able to protect themselves
being picked on, or their lives being threatened. Bullying can
take many forms, as can violence. It doesn’t have to manifest as
actual physical violence, but can be done on a mental or emotional
level. Be careful not to get into the line of fire in this situation, as
things might get out of control quickly, leaving you, and possibly
others, in a vulnerable position. The ‘Heavy Clothing’ can imply
that being rather invisible protects the ‘Hunters’. They may wear
some type of masking apparel or be protected by screens such
as having an important job or role in society. Perhaps they are
in the armed forces and commit atrocities in the name of war.
Their ‘Heavy Clothing’ can camouflage the fact that they are
picking on people that are in defenseless positions; indeed they
may get away with it successfully. Protecting yourself and others
with a barrier of white light may serve to take the charge out of
what’s going on.
Keywords: Satiating one’s aggressive desires. Being able to hit the
mark. Putting up with violence in one’s life, whether physical,
mental, spiritual or emotional. Road, and other, types of rage. The
armed services and their responsibilities. War. Terrorism in its
many forms. Camouflage. Being an armed force. Armaments.
The Caution: Exploitation of those who are more vulnerable.
Taking unfair advantage of the innocent or the less experienced.
Feeling like a sitting duck. Nowhere to run or hide. Hormones
running rampant. Mindless violence. War crimes tribunals. Gang
warfare. Indiscriminate actions.
Scorpio 22
When a man wants to murder
a tiger he calls it sport;when a
tiger wants to murder him,he
calls it ferocity.
George Bernard Shaw
There are many humorous
things in the world:among them
the white man’s notion that he
is less savage than the other
savages.
MarkTwain
Always behave like a duck-keep
calm and unruffled on the
surface but paddle like the devil
underneath.
Jacob Braude
The coward threatens when he
is safe.
Goethe
What constitutes a real,live
human being is more of a
mystery than ever these days,
and men-each one of whom is
a valuable,unique experiment
on the part of nature – are shot
down wholesale.
Hermann Hesse
Have a heart that never hardens,
and a temper that never tires,
and a touch that never hurts.
Charles Dickens
There is no decent place to stand
in a massacre,but if a woman
takes your hand,then go and
stand with her.
Leonard Cohen

<<<PAGE 256>>>
SCORPIO
P
233
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A RABBIT METAMORPHOSED INTO A
NATURE SPIRIT
Commentary: ‘A Rabbit Metamorphosed into a Nature Spirit’
is a rather strange image that seems rather fantastic at first. The
‘Rabbit’ is changing its very nature; it is somehow “morphing”
into a different being, a ‘Nature Spirit’. The ‘Rabbit’ has gone
from using its baser, animal or sexual instincts into living as a
more spiritual being. When something ‘Metamorphoses’ there
is usually a change of appearance and way of behaving or being,
but it is still the same being at a core level, just operating on a
different plane of expression.
Oracle: You may find yourself having a transformative realization
that will take your focus away from your more basic animal
instincts to a more spiritual level of perception. Your vital energies
may remain constant, but the way in which these respond to the
environment can change considerably. Issues such as battling
for survival can become less important. Life takes on a different
purpose and new and more liberating ways of acting in the world
become available. In shifting from a focus on the lower chakras
(physical and sexual) to the higher chakras (third eye and crown)
we move closer to our relationship with the universal energy that
motivates and inspires us. This transformation can lead to a calmer
way of living or perhaps a more specialized state of being. This
can happen through having some kind of religious experience,
such as an epiphany, where we find that life changes on many
levels, leaving us somehow different and unable to go back to
our old ways of being and relating. Welcoming this new state
of being can lead to incredible layers of perception unfolding,
transforming life into a higher vibration and making life more
worthwhile.
Keywords: Revelation of hidden talents. Vegetarianism. Changing
one’s lifestyle completely. Rapid and total transformation.
Morphing. Giving up merely battling for survival. Ascension of
consciousness. Elementals. Evolution. Moving into a new level
of being. Raising one’s vibration. Complete changes. Psychic
attunement. Losing one's sexual charge.
The Caution: Being dissatisfied with transformation as not
economically useful. Feeling ineffective or impotent, having
one’s sexual power taken away. Feeling de-sexed or ‘neutered’.
Losing one’s drive or libido. Feeling alone and misunderstood.
Dumbed-down energies. Neglecting body in favor of spirit or
emotion.
Scorpio 23
We’re born princes and the
civilizing process turns us into
frogs.
Eric Berne
Rabbits of the world-stop!
Anon
I’m not bad;I’m just drawn that
way.
KathleenTurner as Jessica
Rabbit
Don’t go into Mr.McGregor’s
garden:your Father had an
accident there;he was put in a
pie by Mrs.McGregor.
Beatrix Potter
Man is physically as well as
metaphysically a thing of
shreds and patches,borrowed
unequally from good and bad
ancestors,and a misfit from the
start.
RalphWaldo Emerson
The moment we indulge
our affections,the earth is
metamorphosed;there is no
winterandnonight;alltragedies,
all ennui’s,vanish,all duties even.
RalphWaldo Emerson
I am not now that which I have
been.
Lord Byron
All things must change to
something new,to something
strange.
HenryWadsworth Longfellow

<<<PAGE 257>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
234
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CROWDS COMING DOWN THE
MOUNTAIN TO LISTEN TO ONE
INSPIRED MAN
Commentary: ‘Crowds’ are ‘Coming Down The Mountain To
Listen To One Inspired Man’. There is a message that needs to
be heard and people are making their way to the ‘One’ who can
deliver it. There must be a reason for them to come ‘Down the
Mountain to Listen’-there is probably something important and
stimulating that they come together to receive. This ‘One Inspired
Man’ most likely has some gift, certainly he'll have the gift of
speech, knowledge and communication. There’s no guarantee,
however, that everyone is going to be receptive to what’s being
said; people will have many different responses to the messages
being given. Although it’s fairly clear that not all will be swayed,
the message is likely to resonate with many.
Oracle: Whether you are one amongst the ‘Crowds’ or you are,
indeed, the ‘Inspired Man’, you may feel that you have had some
wonderful realizations and insights and now you need to bring
these insights, these messages, ‘Down’, from ‘The Mountain’, and
integrate them into your everyday life in some way. It’s wonderful
to be turned on by an inspired speaker or message, but what
will be done with these revelations or new information? The
truth may very well lie within yourself-listening to the positive
messages from your higher self, or from others who can lift your
focus. This can move you to take charge of your less positive
thoughts and actions. However, there may need to be some kind
of thoughtful discrimination about what’s actually being said
as blindly accepting what’s being imparted can lead to a loss of
one’s individual mindset.
Keywords: Power to sway the feelings and thoughts of many.
The ability to draw a large audience. The Jesus story. Giving
one’s power away to those who apparently have more authority.
Charisma. Having a large audience. The minds and the ears of the
many. Oratory skills. Gurus. Listening. Ascending the mountain
to acheive a purer state of being. Lecturing.
TheCaution: Naiveté, gullibility. Feeling like someone else holds
all the answers, but you don’t. Situations that smack of guru
mentality. Idolatry and the manipulation that can result from it.
Never knowing when to keep quiet. Forcing ideas on others when
they don’t really want to listen. Not letting anyone else get a word
in. Demanding attention. Feeling above everyone. Snobbery.
Scorpio 24
The mountains are fountains
of men as well as of rivers,
of glaciers,and of fertile soil.
The great poets,philosophers,
prophets,able men whose
thoughts and deeds have
moved the world,have come
down from the mountains.
John Muir
Talking much about oneself
can also be a means to conceal
oneself.
Friedrich Nietzsche
That person proves his worth
who can make us want to listen
when he is with us and think
when he is gone.
Grit
The easiest kind of relationship
for me is with ten thousand
people.The hardest is with one.
Joan Baez
It is all right to hold a
conversation but you should let
go of it now and then.
Richard Armour
The reason there are so few
good talkers in public is that
there are so few thinkers in
private.
Anon
And he goes through life,his
mouth open and his mind
closed.
OscarWilde

<<<PAGE 258>>>
SCORPIO
P
235
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN X-RAY PHOTOGRAPH HELPS
WITH THE DIAGNOSIS
Commentary: An ‘X-ray Photograph Helps With The Diagnosis’
of some ailment, dilemma or situation. The ‘X-ray Photograph’
allows things to be revealed that otherwise would not be seen or
understood. The American Heritage Dictionary defines ‘Diagnosis’
as: “The act or process of identifying or determining the nature and
cause of a disease or injury through evaluation of patient history,
examination, and review of laboratory data.” It pierces through
external layers to the core of things to show what’s really there or
what’s really going on. This can allow for remedies to be decided
and healing to be set in motion.
Oracle: You may be in need of a deeper understanding of your
situation. There’s quite possibly the impulse to peel away the layers
of the situation, using the emotions or the intellect. What is needed
or wanted to be known, and what is being done to reveal the reality
or structure of the situation that is facing you? Talking to others
may be necessary, as they can help reflect to you what is really
going on from an uninvolved perspective. Looking somewhere
“inside” for clues can bring issues to light that otherwise would
have gone undetected. An ‘X-ray’ is able to see through layers
into the structures of things, it cuts through extraneous, or
unnecessary, details to get to the heart of the matter to find out
what’s going on. We can use our minds to the same effect; with a
clever ‘Diagnosis’ we can delve into things to find solutions and
remedies. Likewise, a ‘Photograph’ can freeze life in one moment
of time. These “snapshots” can show us many things and can
answer questions that may have otherwise long gone unanswered.
Someone in this story can be feeling that it is impossible to hide
anything as someone is scrutinizing every move that’s made. Look
deeply, you’ll come up with a ‘Diagnosis’.
Keywords: Penetrating insight. Piercing through external
appearances. Pure understanding. Incredible insight and
revelations. Having the eyes to see. X-ray machines, spying,
detective work. Reaching conclusions. Evaluations. Photographs.
Negatives. Radiation. X-ray vision. Expensive and up-to-date
equipment. Chemotherapy. Mammograms. Scanning equipment.
Finding causes. Paparazzi.
The Caution: Disregarding the flesh on the outside-the humanity
of people. Invading other people’s psychic or intellectual space.
Undressing or revealing people through subtle manipulation.
Always being intense and dissatisfied with the easy, or obvious,
answers.
Scorpio 25
A smart mother makes often
a better diagnosis than a poor
doctor.
August Bier
The doctors X-rayed my head
and found nothing.
Dizzy Dean—US baseball
player
Creativity is piercing the
mundane to find the marvelous.
Bill Moyers
Life is uncharted territory.It
reveals its story one moment at
a time.
Leo Buscaglia
To him that watches,everything
is revealed.
Italian Proverb
DIAGNOSIS,n.A physician’s
forecast of the disease by the
patient’s pulse and purse.
Ambrose Bierce
If you don’t ask the right
questions,you don’t get the
right answers.A question
asked in the right way often
points to its own answer.
Asking questions is the ABC of
diagnosis.Only the inquiring
mind solves problems.
Edward Hodnett
If your pictures aren't good
enough,you aren't close enough.
Robert Capa

<<<PAGE 259>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
236
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AMERICAN INDIANS MAKING CAMP
IN NEW TERRITORY
Commentary: ‘American Indians Making Camp in New Territory’
shows people seeking out and finding somewhere ‘New’ to set up
their lives. They’ve found somewhere suitable to make ‘Camp’ and
are probably busy going about their business to ensure they’ll be
comfortable and their needs will be met as best they can. Perhaps
it's intended that they’ll stay long-term in this ‘New Territory’ but
it could also be that they’re just there for the short term and will
be moving on before long.
Oracle:Someone-perhapsmanypeople-havefound‘Newterritory’
and there is a need to acclimatize, assess the environment and get
their lives in order. There is also the need to adjust quickly on
a psychological level to the environment they are settling into.
Whether it’s the actual moving of home, or settling into a new
job, you need to feel at home in both an inner and outer sense.
This ‘New Territory’ doesn’t necessarily have to be about actual
encampments; its “newness” can be represented in an emotional
or spiritual framework. However, if someone doesn’t feel at home,
there may be a creeping sense of unease as you or others find it
hard to relax and feel safe and accepted in this new environment.
If there is no real conflict over this ‘Territory’ and no stepping
on other people’s toes, this can be a very enriching experience
that can lead to all sorts of new experiences, relationships and
possibilities. However, people sometimes merely inhabit a space
and then depart leaving a mess all around them. How can you
and others help in making an effort to ensure that everyone's
territory, living and personal space, and even emotional space is
not overcrowded, compromised or damaged in some way?
Keywords: Settling in. Walk-ins. Having to learn the rules of
being in a new environment. The need for freedom to live
one’s life as one wants. Concerns with territory. Immigration.
Migration across countries. Gathering things together for family
and community needs. Tents. Shelter. Co-habitation. Revering and
protecting the environment. Setting up camp. Going walkabout.
Squatters. Respecting boundaries. Reservations.
TheCaution: Moving into or invading other's territory. Putting up
with things when one should move on. Feeling invaded. Kicking
people out because they don’t fit in or don’t belong. Segregation
on grounds of color, race or religion. Compromising other's living
space. Arriving unannounced. Barging in. Attack and invasion.
Scorpio 26
We are the land.To the best
of my understanding,that is
the fundamental idea that
permeates American Indian life.
Paula Gunn Allen
Illegal aliens have always been
a problem in the United States.
Ask an Indian.
Robert Orben
A hundred men may make
an encampment,but it takes
a woman to make a home.
Chinese Proverb
Idon’tfeelwedidwrongintaking
thisgreatcountryawayfrom
them.Thereweregreatnumbers
ofpeoplewhoneedednewland,
andtheIndianswereselfishly
tryingtokeepitforthemselves.
JohnWayne
Some national parks have
long waiting lists for camping
reservations.When you have
to wait a year to sleep next
to a tree,something is wrong.
George Carlin
The Puritans gave thanks
for being preserved from the
Indians,and we give thanks
for being preserved from the
Puritans.
Finley Peter Dunne
Life is uncharted territory.It
reveals it's story one moment at
a time.
Leo Buscaglia

<<<PAGE 260>>>
SCORPIO
P
237
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MILITARY BAND MARCHES
NOISILY ON THROUGH THE CITY
STREETS
Commentary: A ‘Military Band’ is shown. It ‘Marches Noisily On
Through The City Streets’. As it makes its way along the streets it
draws attention to itself through its music and the loud banging
of drums. The ‘Military Band’ can inspire national pride amongst
the onlookers, or it can arouse suspicion and distrust as people are
left wondering just what the real agenda is. Is the ‘Military Band’
rallying people together or is it just flexing ‘Military’ muscles to
show the common folk who’s in charge?
Oracle: There is occasionally a need to make a show for
society to remind us of our own or our country’s successes
and achievements. You may find that this will take up a great
deal of your time possibly for no real return, but the morale of
those around you will benefit and that should be the true goal.
Sometimes there’s a perceived need to impress others with one’s
existence, so that they don’t forget that you exist. However, this
Symbol can also show people who make enormous amounts of
noise and demand attention, drowning out all that is going on
around them. These people are often hard to ignore and can be
irritating and downright disruptive. Perhaps they have a “drum
that they need to bang” in order to wake up others who are not
paying attention to their needs, wants or desires or they are
trying to wake people from their apathy. Sometimes the mere
act of showing attention, appreciation and admiration can stop
the need for such noisy displays and bring everything back to a
more peaceful space.
Keywords: Making music to rouse people from complacency.
Noisy announcements. Demanding attention. Trumpeting
achievements. Reminders from the authorities that individuals
are often not in charge. Celebrations of past battles. Corporate
advertising. Peace rallies or war marches. Marching and drills.
Precision movements. Baton twirling. Drums and trumpets. Spit
and polish.
The Caution: A lot of volume that can be too pompous. So much
volume that the true message gets lost. Demanding to be heard.
Banging one’s drum, even when others might be unresponsive
or not want to hear. Blaring announcements. Warnings to others
to follow orders or to be complicit. Big ego displays. Propaganda.
Threats to peace. Momentary disruptions.
Scorpio 27
If a man does not keep pace
with his companions,perhaps
it is because he hears a different
drummer.Let him step to the
music which he hears,however
measured or far away.
Henry DavidThoreau
We should face reality and our
past mistakes in an honest,adult
way.Boasting of glory does not
make glory,and singing in the
dark does not dispel fear.
King Hussein
Love is not a victory march.
Leonard Cohen
The intellectual man requires
a fine bait;the sots are easily
amused.But everybody is
drugged with his own frenzy,
and the pageant marches at all
hours,with music and banner
and badge.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Once vigorous measures appear
to be the only means left of
bringing the Americans to a
due submission to the mother
country,the colonies will submit.
King George III
Military justice is to justice
what military music is to music.
Groucho Marx
Military intelligence is a
contradiction in terms.
Groucho Marx

<<<PAGE 261>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
238
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE KING OF THE FAIRIES
APPROACHING HIS DOMAIN
Commentary: ‘The King of the Fairies’ is seen ‘Approaching His
Domain’.Heunderstands,orhasasenseof,wherehebelongsandhis
placeintheoverallschemeofthings.Heisapproachingorreclaiming
what somehow “belongs” to him. He may have been away from his
true place for a long time, he may have had some reason to leave
temporarily or he may never have known (or found) where his true
place was. Whatever, he is now coming closer and closer to his
‘Domain’, his “realm”.
Oracle: This pictures a situation of someone who needs to feel in
charge, or that they are an authority figure or they are in their own
element. ‘His Domain’, in this situation, is not necessarily a place that
would be broadly seen as a “kingdom”, but it can appear to be so in
their mind. There can be the feeling that there is a nice, calm and
spiritual place to be found. You may feel that you, or someone else,
arefinallyfindingtheplacewhereonecanbelongorfeelcomfortable.
This may have been after a long period of being somewhere alien,
or in a place that didn’t resonate with their true self. A new sense of
claimingone’spower,beinga‘King’,someone“incharge”,mayarise.
As this is said to be the ‘King’s Domain’, this place may be outside of
or disconnected from the normal rules and expectations of society.
Hence, it can show someone living in a world of his or her own
creationorimagination.Therecanalsobethefeelingofhavingsome
formofpoweroverothers.Powerandleadershipshouldbeaccepted
and embraced with humility and gratitude, not merely throwing
around the ego. People will then show respect and gratitude. Being
a prominent “leader” can be fine as long as there’s no exploitation or
demands made upon the people around. Some probably have, after
all, kindly agreed to be the ‘Fairies’.
Keywords: Imaginary worlds. Finding a place. Feeling comfortable.
Taking command of life. Leadership and its responsibilities. Feeling
like a dominant leader and that one has a doting populace. Being
welcomed. Midsummer Night’s Dream. Returning home. Web
domains. Finding one’s true vocation or purpose.
TheCaution:Imaginaryworldsanddependenceontrickery.Ridicule
aimed at those that don’t have their feet on the ground. Someone
acting like a “hot shot”. Feelings of superiority which alienate others.
The fear of approaching the unknown. Never finding a real place to
settle down. Fairy tales about how life could or should be. Lording
it over others. Being bossy and commanding. Being impotent. The
fear and loathing of having to accept one’s true place. Not taking
command of one’s life. Loneliness. Feeling locked out.
Scorpio 28
Lord,what fools these mortals
be!
William Shakespeare
The king is the man who can.
Thomas Carlyle
A little kingdom I possess,
Where thoughts and feelings
dwell;And very hard the task I
find Of governing it well.
Louisa May Alcott
I could be bound in a nut shell
and count myself a king of
infinite space.
William Shakespeare
But above all things I strive to
train them to be useful to the
Holy Church of God and for the
glory of your kingdom.
Alcuin ofYork
I am,indeed,a king,for I know
how to rule myself.
Pietro Aretino
Obsessed by a fairy tale,we
spend our lives searching for a
magic door and a lost kingdom
of peace.
Eugene O’Neill
Unfortunately this earth is not
..a fairyland,but a struggle
for life,perfectly natural and
therefore extremely harsh.
Martin Bormann
Not what I have,but what I do is
my kingdom.
Thomas Carlyle

<<<PAGE 262>>>
SCORPIO
P
239
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INDIAN WOMAN PLEADING TO
THE CHIEF FOR THE LIVES OF HER
CHILDREN
Commentary: ‘An Indian Woman’ is ‘Pleading to the Chief For the
Lives of Her Children’. Something that the children have done, or are
suspected of doing, has led to the ‘Children’ needing the ‘Woman’
to stand up for them, state their case clearly and ask for mercy or
leniency. It could be that the ‘Children’ are not really children, but
are something merely seen as being useless, expendable or to be
sacrificed for other causes.
Oracle: You may find a need to stand up for those in your care,
whether it is your ‘Children’, your ideals, creative pursuits, or other
people. Even if they might somehow draw or deserve rejection,
punishment or judgment, there is a need for you to act as a go-
between, or an advocate. It needs to be remembered, though, that
being“deservingofpunishment”isoftenaperceptionofsociety,and
quite probably prejudice, and not always something that’s grounded
in reality. On the other hand, you may need someone else to be
an advocate or to translate your feelings or actions so that others
may understand. The solution will probably best be found not so
much in being defensive as in simply asking for leniency, or that
attention be paid to the matter at hand. Apologies may need to be
made. When people understand what is truly going on they often
relax and this serves to take a lot of the emotional “charge” out of
the proceedings. As the situation is brought more into the light,
and people see what’s really happening, there is usually a lot of the
pain, distrust and fear taken away. People will be more forgiving or
accepting if they understand the full picture.
Keywords: Patterns of family dominance. Pleading one’s cause.
Seeking love, mercy or forgiveness. Asking higher powers to step
in, help or heal. Intercession. Counseling. Protecting the younger
ones.Familylawcourts,magistrates,lawyers.Divorce.Youngpeople
taken seriously. Guilt and innocence. Weaving words to a desired
outcome. Intervention. Schools. Juvenile delinquents. Being nailed
for an offence. Speaking on behalf of others. Tribunals. Begging for
mercy. Custody battles. Sexual discrimination. Advocates.
The Caution: Being dominated. Sacrificing one’s self for peace and
quiet. Making a spectacle. Ramming one’s opinions. Going on the
defensive.Bullyingandbrowbeating.Harpingonandonaboutthings
that should be forgiven or forgotten. Disruptive elements that get
away with anything. Being expelled. Being made an example of.
Scorpio 29
All humanity is one undivided
and indivisible family,and each
one of us is responsible for the
misdeeds of all the others.I
cannot detach myself from the
wickedest soul.
Gandhi
Blessed are the merciful,for
they shall obtain mercy.
The Bible
Children need love,especially
when they don’t deserve it.
Harold Hulbert
Childrenwishfatherslooked
butwiththeireyes;fathersthat
childrenwiththeirjudgment
looked;andeithermaybewrong.
William Shakespeare
In the early days of the Indian
Territory,there were no such
things as birth certificates.You
being there was certificate
enough.
Will Rogers
Fewparentsnowadayspayany
regardtowhattheirchildrensay
tothem.Theold-fashionedrespect
fortheyoungisfastdyingout.
OscarWilde
Pretty much all the honest truth
telling there is in the world is
done by children.
OliverWendell Holmes
God could not be everywhere
and therefore he made mothers.
Jewish Proverb

<<<PAGE 263>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
P
240
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CHILDREN IN HALLOWEEN
COSTUMES INDULGING IN VARIOUS
PRANKS
Commentary: ‘Children in Halloween Costumes’ are seen
‘Indulging In Various Pranks’. They are most likely having a
wonderful time, playing around in the streets, going door to
door and watching the reactions of the people they encounter.
Sometimes they wear lots of makeup and masks in their endeavor
to win people over or to convince them that they deserve their
treats. If they don’t receive a treat, or reward, sometimes they get
very mischievous and play ‘Pranks’ on people. This Symbol can
show the ‘Prankster’ in all of us, in some measure. ‘Halloween’ is
said to be a time when the veil between the living and the dead
becomes an illusion, nebulous or very thin.
Oracle: You may feel that the trickster is out and around at the
moment, or you may be the focus of pranks. Whichever, it should
be acknowledged that there needs to be an occasional outlet for
immature or fun loving energies. Often, though, it’s hard to relax
when this energy is around. It can be difficult to know when to
take things at face value or to see, or realize, a deeper meaning
when it can be loaded with illusions. Not knowing what’s going
to happen next can lead to a feeling of un-ease. What ghoulish
emotion or reality may emerge next? Are these tricks or is this
more about things getting blown up and out of control? What’s
important here is to play the game, or to go along with it, and to
know that it’s basically harmless. This can picture somebody who
just can’t take anything seriously. In the true sense of ‘Halloween’,
the ‘Prankster’ is not really malicious in any way and is really
looking for a reward. Gifts, small trinkets or the fun of seeing
someone’s shock and reaction, whether this is superficial or real,
is probably enough. In the end, it’s often really only about play.
Keywords: The madman inside all of us. Astro-drama. The lifting
of the veil between the living and the dead. Unintegrated energies
playing tricks on the unwary. Tricksters. Creative surprises.
Halloween. Trick or treat. Practical jokes played on the unwary.
Roaming the streets. Dressing up. Ghouls and ghosts.
The Caution: Being unable to connect with real and immediate
emotions. Contempt for the establishment. ‘Mucking around’ and
not getting to the core of things. Evading one’s responsibilities
through being silly or madcap. Not respecting other people's
boundaries.
Scorpio 30
It is a double pleasure to trick
the trickster.
Jean de la Fontaine
Alas!That such affected tricks
should flourish in a child of six!
Hilaire Belloc
If there was a trick,there must
be a trickster.
Dorothy Miller Richardson
There’s no trick to being a
humorist when you have the
whole government working for
you.
Will Rogers
You can’t teach an old dogma
new tricks.
Dorothy Parker
But man,proud man,drest in
a little brief authority,most
ignorant of what he's most
assured,his glassy essence
like an angry ape,plays such
fantastic tricks before high
heaven as make the angels
weep.
William Shakespeare
Curses are like processions:they
return to whence they set out.
Italian Proverb

<<<PAGE 264>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
241
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
RETIRED ARMY VETERANS GATHER
TO REAWAKEN OLD MEMORIES
Commentary: ‘Retired Army Veterans Gather to Reawaken Old
Memories’ is an image of a gathering or reunion of people who
have shared some kind of companionship, struggle or history. In
this ‘Gathering’, comrades reminisce about tales of the “old days”,
‘Reawakening Old Memories’. Gathering together can ignite old
feelings of camaraderie and great passions, even amongst people
that they may not remember or know so well. This can evoke many
emotions, all the way from sadness to laughter and amazement.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, going over the memories of
“old battles” may bring clues to how you can handle any current
ones. You may be drawn to those who have shared your struggle
or have gone through similar battles in life. Perhaps you haven’t
seen each other for a very long time. Through sharing these ‘Old
Memories’, old wounds can be healed as new insights are gleaned.
There’s a need to be cautious, though, as this ‘Gathering’ can often
exclude those who don’t measure up or fit in. This Symbol can
point to a feeling of “being in the club”, with those that don’t share
these memories feeling as though they’re on the outside, looking
in. Are there people who feel that they are left out of sharing these
experiences? Having not had the same history, experiences or the
woes of battle that the others have, can make them feel that they
are on the other side of the fence, and, in extreme cases, they
may seem like “the enemy”. Also, the ‘Gathering to Reawaken Old
Memories’ can reinforce injuries, wounds and hurts and these can
be brought up, so that they’re rehashed over and over. This can
cause difficulties in healing, recovery, forgiving and forgetting,
all of which may be necessary in order to move on. As these are
‘Retired Army Veterans’, it’s through the passing of time and with
the hindsight of age that many things can be laid to rest.
Keywords: Masculine domains. Understanding the individual’s
needs and idealistic struggles. Moratoriums and calls for peace.
Past life memories of fellowship. Prisoners of war. Memorials
to war. Bringing up painful memories in the hope of sharing
understanding and healing. Tears of the past. Being confronted
by memories. School, and other, reunions. Talking over strategies.
Finding comrades. Brothers and sisters.
The Caution: Being unable to let go of the past. Exaggerating past
successes to justify current strategies. Excluding others as being
“unworthy”, having not experienced the struggle or pain. Going
over things from the past and never letting them go. Boasting and
glorifying. Identities that belong in the past.
Sagittarius
1
When the days of rejoicing are
over,When the flags are stowed
safely away,They will dream of
another wild‘War to EndWars’,
And another wild Armistice day.
Robert Graves
I like to reminisce with people I
don’t know.
StevenWright
Great perils have this beauty,
that they bring to light the
fraternity of strangers.
Victor Hugo
Forsake not an old friend,for
the new is not comparable
unto him.A new friend is as
new wine:when it is old thou
shalt drink it with pleasure.
Ecclesiasticus
There is no stronger bond
of friendship than a mutual
enemy.
Frankfort Moore
Theso-calledlessonsofhistory
areforthemostpartthe
rationalizationsofthevictors.
Historyiswrittenbythesurvivors.
Max Lerner
Those who cannot remember
the past are condemned to
repeat it.
George Santayana

<<<PAGE 265>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
242
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE OCEAN COVERED WITH
WHITECAPS
Commentary: ‘The Ocean Covered With Whitecaps’ shows what
happens when the wind whips up the surface of the ‘Ocean’,
turning the water to froth. The wind can sometimes quickly
bring up a storm, coming seemingly from out of nowhere.
What appears on the surface is often very different from what’s
happening just below it. Things are, or are going to be, much
calmer and quieter than you would imagine from looking at the
whipped up ‘Whitecaps’.
Oracle: The day-to-day experiences of life can create a “quick
wind” which can blow out of control if things get overheated
or overstated. Because these experiences take up a lot of space
in our current thoughts, they seem to be more important than
they really are. In essence, they are really only passing by, just
so much “froth and bubble” or “monkey chatter” and will soon
be replaced by other considerations. The effect, however, can
play havoc with your emotions and can create some storms of
their own. At this time there seems to be a lot going on and you
may feel that your emotions are on a real bumpy ride. You may
find that surface emotions have been whipped up and this has
led to a concern that is disproportionate to the depth of the
real issue before you. Things have a deeper sense of strength
and permanence than they seem on the surface. Whether your
situation contains difficult components, or whipped up and
excited ones, the truth of the matter is that the foundations of
your life are much more settled and the surface emotional distress
is probably just misleading matters. Staying anchored to what is
true, permanent and stable in your life can help you get through
whatever has been churned up. If you understand that the wind
will die down, or at least change, then you can simply ride out
this time secure in the strength of your deeper stability. Getting
below the surface where things are calmer and more reliable
could alter your perspective.
Keywords: Mobilization of energy and emotions. Safety in more
secure emotions. Blustery days. Churning thoughts. Being flighty
and changeable. Overblown reactions. Energy that needs an outlet
for expression. The need for stillness and meditation.
TheCaution: Getting fussed and irritable over nothing, or at least
very little. Nervousness. Whipping up emotions and reactions.
Overdoing things. Not knowing how to rest. Responding too
readily to external conditions. Gathering gloom.
Sagittarius
2
Thou shalt not separate thy
being from BEING,and the
rest,but merge the Ocean in
the deep,the drop within the
Ocean.
H.P.Blavatsky
Don’t think there are no
crocodiles because the water is
calm.
Malayan Proverb
The winds and the waves are
always on the side of the ablest
navigators.
Edward Gibbon
Always behave like a duck—
keep calm and unruffled on the
surface but paddle like the devil
underneath.
Jacob Braude
Still waters run deep.
Proverb
Below raging waves,the
depths of the ocean do not
churn as does its surface.
Down there,temperature,
depth and salinity create the
hydrodynamics.
Philip Sedgwick
The populace is like the sea
motionless in itself,but stirred
by every wind,even the lightest
breeze.
Titus Livius

<<<PAGE 266>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
243
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO MEN PLAYING CHESS
Commentary: ‘Two Men Playing Chess’ is an image of people
concentrating and planning moves in order to defeat their
opponent in a game. They have to be quiet, focused and attuned
to what it is they’re doing if they want to succeed. The theme of
a ‘Chess’ game is to knock the opponent out, to literally kill the
king, and to take his position and his territory. There can be a
certain degree of tension in the air as each tries to “checkmate”
the other. First, one may appear to be “winning”, and then the
other may make a sudden, sometimes completely unexpected or
unforeseen move, get the upper hand and take the whole game.
Alternatively, it could be an all-out slaughter if one person is more
practiced or efficient at the game than the other.
Oracle: In the current situation you may need to be very
thoughtful and cautious about the moves you make and the risks
that you are prepared to take. It’s important to take into account
the wider picture and all the possible outcomes of any actions
taken. Impulsive acts with no forward planning will probably be
risky and may lead to others taking advantage of the situation.
The same can happen if you show your weak side. There can be
a lot at stake here if you lose, but there may be much to be gained
if you win. Effective strategies and forward thinking maneuvers
are needed. Take some time to compose yourself and assess
what’s really going on: you may then find the way forward or
out of the maze or conflict. However, it can be very difficult to
relax in this type of competitive environment—one often feels
that they can’t let their guard down for one moment in case they
are taken advantage of, or overtaken, in some way. Keep your
concentration focused on the main aim and outcome. Take one
step at a time, thinking all the while, and move with purpose
and forethought.
Keywords: Strategic competition. Seeing the picture several
moves ahead. Arguments that can go on and on. Finding
justification for being combative. Throwing down the gauntlet to
the other. Taking lives. The need for peacekeeping. War strategies.
Matching wits. Facing each other head on. Being royalty or being
a mere pawn. Tactical maneuvers. Lawsuits. Custody. Having the
bigger stick. Divorce. Disputes. Wit against wit.
The Caution: Depending on pure luck. Underestimating the
opponent’s skill or strategy. Arguments and arguing for the sake
of it. Bickering and trying to get the better of the other. Always
taking an opposing side, no matter what is really happening.
Sagittarius
3
A quarrel is quickly settled when
deserted by one party:there is
no battle unless there be two.
Seneca
Once the game is over,the king
and the pawn go back into the
same box.
Italian Proverb
It is one of man’s curious
idiosyncrasies to create
difficulties for the pleasure of
resolving them.
Joseph Marie De Maistre
Sometimes you have to move
backward to get a step forward.
Amar Gopal Bose
What a strange game.The only
winning move is not to play.
Anon—On war games
Victory goes to the player who
makes the next-to-last mistake.
Savielly Grigorievitch
Tartakower—Chess master
Daring ideas are like chessmen
moved forward.They may be
beaten,but they may start a
winning game.
Goethe
I feel as if I were a piece in
a game of chess when my
opponent says of it:that piece
cannot be moved.
Soren Kierkegaard

<<<PAGE 267>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
244
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LITTLE CHILD LEARNING TO WALK
WITH THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF
PARENTS
Commentary: ‘A Little Child’ is shown ‘Learning to Walk With
the Encouragement of Parents’. The ‘Child’ needs the support of
the ‘Parents’ in order to learn how to do many of the most basic
things. The ‘Child’ needs guidance, love and encouragement in
order to grow and have faith in his or her own abilities. Sometimes
we have the ‘Encouragement’ and support of our elders, other
times not. The ‘Parents’ can’t be there all the time to catch the
‘Little Child’ if it falls, so the ‘Little Child’ must learn to master
the steps that are needed in order to become an independent
and confident grownup.
Oracle: You may be moving into a new phase of learning that,
despite all your previous experience, is surprisingly difficult.
Patience and step-by-step progress is needed now. There may be
those around you who don’t take your difficulties seriously, but
the struggles to make progress will finally pay off, enabling the
situation to move forward. This Symbol pictures a new situation
that has to be tackled in a new way. You may feel nervous about
taking your first steps towards what you want to accomplish.
This may have something to do with the need for increased
independence and while it may be exciting, it can also be nerve-
wracking. Adopting creative methods and having an open mind
and heart will help guarantee progress, even if it’s not always easy.
‘Encouragement’ and praise from others often helps to bolster
the persistence that’s needed to move past this ‘Learning’ phase.
True independence from outer circumstances takes time to learn
and achieve. Being patient and not judgmental or demanding in
this situation will bring rewards.
Keywords: Making genuine progress or always tripping over.
Instinctive determination to get on with the job. People taking
delight in the smallest progress. Baby steps leading to big
things. Trying out and accepting one’s individuality. Help from
authorities. Seeking guidance and advice. Feeling mother earth
under your feet. Parental assistance. Walking on new ground.
The Caution: Relying on skills not yet mastered. Not taking the
initiative to put one’s self forward. Putting your self at risk rather
than accepting help. Acting like one is incompetent in order to
draw sympathy and/or help. Meddling and “assisting” when one
should be on the sidelines, encouraging. Knowing that someone
is going to “trip over” and not offering help.
Sagittarius
4
A toddling little girl is a center
of common feeling which
makes the most dissimilar
people understand each other.
George Eliot
Life is just a short walk from the
cradle to the grave—and it sure
behooves us to be kind to one
another along the way.
Alice Childress
We are all novices.Only the
dead have nothing left to learn.
Anon
One step at a time is good
walking.
Chinese Proverb
We spend the first twelve
months of our children’s lives
teaching them to walk and
talk and the next twelve telling
them to sit down and shut up.
Phyllis Diller
Children,you are very little,
And your bones are very brittle;
If you would grow great and
stately,You must try to walk
sedately.
Robert Louis Stevenson
Parents who are afraid to put
their foot down usually have
children who step on their toes.
Chinese Proverb

<<<PAGE 268>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
245
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD OWL PERCHED HIGH UP IN
A TREE
Commentary: ‘An Old Owl is Perched High Up in a Tree’. With
the ability to twist his head right around, the wise ‘Old Owl’ sees
all, seeing what others miss, and keeps very quiet whilst digesting
all that is going on. Even though they appear to sit quietly, the
‘Owl’ is able to quickly snare its prey in the flash of a moment.
The ‘Old Owl’ pictured here is ‘Perched High Up in a Tree’; he is
far from the tumult at ground level and is out of reach from most
predators. He can observe wide vistas below him and watch for
prey. Owls also have incredible sense of hearing, pinpointing
sounds accurately.
Oracle: This Symbol can indicate a degree of insomnia caused by
an active mind and thinking too much at bedtime. What are the
hidden elements of the situation facing you? If you sit quietly apart
from things for a while and really endeavor to see “in the dark”,
you’ll reveal things that previously only lurked in the shadows.
You may need to consult with aged wisdom, either from within
yourself or from the outside world. Knowledge of any type, but
particularly knowledge garnered from books, can lead you to
seeing farther into very difficult situations where everything
seemed dark, and sometimes forbidding. The ‘Owl’ may look
sleepy and sedate but it can move very fast the minute is sees
what it wants – it can move with surprising swiftness to catch its
objective. Emulating this behavior can bring a certain solitude,
but this may be just what is needed. However, a feeling of being
seperate, high and remote can cause alienation, so be watchful
for when its time to start actively participating in life again.
Keywords: Wisdom and strength. Evening contemplation.
Keeping thoughts to oneself. A wise “sage” type of person.
Nocturnal vision. Exalted wisdom. “Night owls”. Heightened sight
and seeing. Being silent and alert for the slightest movement. The
ability to see all around. The spirit of birds. Silent flight. Having
acute hearing. Lofty ideals.
The Caution: Smug denial of available wisdom. Someone
thinking they know it all. Not wanting to join in with others in
fun activities. Acting old before their time. Excluding others as
being frivolous and unknowing. Waiting for one’s prey. Black
magic. Being old before one's time. Always being alone. Remote
and cut off. Sitting isolated. Saying nothing when one should be
saying something. Inability to sleep soundly.
Sagittarius
5
A wise old owl sat on an oak;
The more he saw the less he
spoke;The less he spoke the
more he heard;Why aren’t we
like that wise old bird?
Edward Hersey Richards
Think first and speak
afterwards.
Proverb
The barn owl’s left ear is higher
than the right and points down
to catch sounds from below.His
right points up to hear above.
365 AmazingTrivia Facts
Alone and warming his five wits,
The white owl in the belfry sits.
Lord AlfredTennyson
Nature has given us two ears,
two eyes,and but one tongue—
to the end that we should hear
and see more than we speak.
Socrates
The world is governed more by
appearances than by realities,
so that it is fully as necessary to
seem to know something as to
know it.
DanielWebster
The quality of decision is like
the well-timed swoop of a
falcon which enables it to strike
and destroy its victim.
SunTzu

<<<PAGE 269>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
246
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GAME OF CRICKET
Commentary: ‘A Game of Cricket’ is seen. ‘Cricket’ is a ‘Game’
that is associated with gentility, gamesmanship and decorum. It
is a bat and ball game played on green fields with “gentlemen”
players, all dressed in their “whites”. There are two teams, with
11 players each. It is a game of skill, fairness, and peaceful
cooperation amongst its players. In days of old, particularly in
England, people would gather from around the district to play
on the field or on the pitch and the ‘Game’ was usually one of
friendliness and good-humored sportsmanship.
Oracle: This reflects a time when it is not necessarily the game
that is important, but how it is played. You may find that integrity
is vital in this situation and your honesty and ability to “play by
the rules of the game” will give you just rewards, even if there
is some initial sacrifice. Careful teamwork is probably needed
to stop things getting through the gaps. Although the situation
may take some time, everyone must keep on their toes, ready for
something that may come out of “left field”. It is important in this
situation for everyone to understand the expectations required
of them. Honesty and integrity are important, and also highly
regarded. Behaving against these expectations can receive a harsh
reaction and treatment and possibly even rejection from others
on the playing field. This is not the time for anyone to be pushing
the envelope to test what is acceptable to the rules of society. The
rules and guidelines for operating in this situation are, or should
be, made very clear – there will be some form of punishment for
dishonesty. There is a need to remember everyone's position in
the game: your own and others. Also, every game has its rules.
Keywords: Playing by the rules. Stiff upper lip responses.
Seeing through the illusions of what constitutes “polite society”.
Having a role to play in the game of life. Sportsmanship. Being
the “batsman” or the “bowler”. Running and playing. Fair play.
Impeccable behavior. Moving at will around the field. Scoring
runs. People in the outfield. Holding the bat. Winning the toss.
Opposing teams. Games that go on for day after day. Patience.
Summer games. Going by the umpire’s decision. Everyone having
a go.
The Caution: Difficulty in showing one’s true feelings and
emotions. Going against the rules of the game. Something that
simply “is just not cricket” (fair play). Curve balls. Being caught
out. Games that are boring and long-winded. Being the 13th man.
Silly rules that don't make sense.
Sagittarius
6
Only mad dogs and Englishmen
go out in the noonday sun.
Indian Proverb
Always keep your composure.
You can’t score from the penalty
box;and to win,you have to
score.
Bobby Hull
How a man plays the game
shows something of his
character,how he loses shows
all of it.
Anon
Please don’t ask me what the
score is,I’m not even sure what
the game is.
Ashleigh Brilliant
Baseball,like cricket,is an
elegant and leisurely summer
game during which tension
builds up slowly.
U.S.Department of Commerce
Cricket… you have two sides:
one out in the field and one
in.Each man that’s in the side
that’s in goes out and when he’s
out he comes in and the next
man goes in until he’s out.
Anon
If you must play,decide on three
things at the start:the rules of
the game,the stakes,and the
quitting time.
Chinese Proverb

<<<PAGE 270>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
247
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
CUPID KNOCKING AT THE DOOR OF
A HUMAN HEART
Commentary: ‘Cupid Knocking at the Door of a Human Heart’ is
an image of love asking to be let in. Barriers and defenses may be
keeping him from coming inside, but how long will the ‘Heart’ be
able to resist? Opening the door to one’s ‘Heart’ can lead to new
opportunities and possibilities around the issue of relationships.
Finding “the key” to the ‘Heart’ can lead to big realizations about
one’s self and others.
Oracle: It is particularly important to allow your heart center
to open when you are in caring company as this can lead to
amazing new things happening in your life now. By releasing
your emotions and letting your guard down you open up the
possibility for romantic love. However, do look out for any
unrealistic projections put onto others and the need for seeking
love, salvation or joy only through the other. We must find it in
ourselves first before finding it in someone else, if that is what
we really want. Having your consciousness overwhelmed with
the thought, love or presence of another can be uplifting, but
it can also become a burden. Being consumed with the love of
a person can be quite stifling, whether you are on the giving or
the receiving end. This is especially so if your affections are not
reciprocated. If the other person doesn’t respond in the same
way, it can lead to sadness, bitterness and obsessive tendencies.
Certain relationships can feel fated or impossible to ignore.
Another aspect of this Symbol is that you may already be in a
relationship with someone and a new love pops up unexpectedly.
Is someone tapping you on the shoulder whilst you’re busy not
taking any notice? What is the true depth of your relationship?
Regardless, as ‘Cupid is Knocking’, it appears that something
wonderful is trying to get into your life. Are you resisting 'Cupid's
Knock'?
Keywords: Respectful invitation of love. Seeing purity of motive.
Fear of commitment. Fear of romance. A key or an arrow. Cupids
and cherubs. Unlocking the heart. One-pointed, focused energy,
which can become obsessive. Softening one’s boundaries. Cupid’s
bow. The need to lighten up one’s approach to others.
The Caution: Waiting instead of taking the initiative. Rejecting
love or emotion for fear of losing independence. Keeping up a
strong, brave, severe face when one could be loosening up and
enjoying another. Barriers and defenses around the heart. Seeing
potential lovers in everyone. Being attracted to those you wouldn’t
normally notice. Frigid responses.
Sagittarius
7
Gravitation cannot be held
responsible for people falling
in love.
Albert Einstein
Two friends,two bodies with
one soul inspired.
Homer
Those that go searching for love
only make manifest their own
lovelessness,and the loveless
never find love,only the loving
find love,and they never have
to seek for it.
D.H.Lawrence
It’s a little bit the fiddle,but
lots more who holds the bow.
WilburnWilson
The bow kept taut will quickly
break,kept loosely strung,it will
serve you when you need it.
Plato
Friendship is love without his
wings!
Lord Byron
You kiss my lips and then it's
done.
Leonard Cohen
I am not the one who loves–it's
love that chooses me.
Leonard Cohen

<<<PAGE 271>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
248
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DEEP WITHIN THE DEPTHS OF THE
EARTH,NEW ELEMENTS ARE BEING
FORMED
Commentary: ‘Deep Within the Depths of the Earth, New
Elements are Being Formed’ indicates that deep, organic changes
are occurring. Whilst these shifts may be big, significant and
extremely life changing, they may not be all that obvious on the
surface. It seems certain that ‘Deep’ down and ‘Within’, there is
a lot going on, regardless of one’s external demeanor.
Oracle: You may find new responses to life coming from deep
within your mind and soul. This creation of new and essential
levels of awareness is part of the natural result of inner changes
and growth. ‘Within the Depths’ of our lives and our very being
there are extraordinary layers of possibilities, complications and
divergent ‘Elements’. Psychology and astrology can reveal these
‘Depths’, through which the personality can be seen more clearly
in its many elements. The way these ‘Elements’ of our lives and
our natures are combined results in the complex nature of our
being. These ‘Elements’ can be enriched by the experiences
of life, the lessons being learnt, and, as a result, new ways of
being can be embraced and accepted. It is almost inevitable that
this development will occur, but living a shallow existence or
stubbornly refusing to accept the inevitable changes that happen
within and around us can restrict energy. Allowing your inner
‘Depths’ to be transformed and enriched by life is part of what
this Symbol is about. This Symbol also reflects the imminent,
or inevitable, rising of these ‘New Elements’ to the surface, and
the need for you to look ‘Within’ to benefit from this inner shift.
Know that, by the very nature of having experiences in life, we
are intuitively creating new potential, greater possibility and
deeper wisdom in our lives.
Keywords: Deep elemental processes and change. Shifting of
conservative values. Mining in its many forms. Crystal healings.
Minerals, mining, colloidal minerals. Organic changes and shifts.
Volcanoes and earthquakes. Earth rumblings. Reaching maturity.
Earth, wind, fire and water. Mud and steam. Alchemical shifts.
The Caution: Moving forward while elements are still forming.
Denying inner processes as unimportant. Not showing any change
on the surface. Clinging stubbornly to old and outworn ways.
Being afraid of change, particularly that which can’t be seen.
Unhealthy growths. Tumors.
Sagittarius
8
No pressure,no diamonds.
Mary Case
Crystals grew inside rock
like arithmetic flowers.They
lengthened and spread,added
plane to plane in an awed
and perfect obedience to an
absolute geometry that even
stones—maybe only the
stones—understood.
Annie Dillard
I prefer to explore the most
intimate moments,the smaller,
crystallized details we all hinge
our lives on.
Rita Dove
In the attitude of silence the
soul finds the path in a clearer
light,and what is elusive and
deceptive resolves itself into
crystal clearness.Our life is a
long and arduous quest after
Truth.
Mahatma Gandhi
I see where we are starting
to pay some attention to our
neigbors to the south.We could
never understand why Mexico
wasn’t just crazy about us;for
we have always had their good
will,and oil and minerals,at
heart.
Will Rogers

<<<PAGE 272>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
249
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MOTHER LEADS HER SMALL
CHILD STEP BY STEP UP THE STAIRS
Commentary: ‘A Mother Leads Her Small Child Step by Step Up
the Stairs’ pictures a situation where one needs to assist someone
less experienced or indeed, possibly less evolved, to overcome
difficulties and to rise up and learn to cope, to learn about life
or to understand. The ‘Mother’ is there to guide and encourage
the ‘Small Child’ in taking these rather unfamiliar ‘Steps’. Even if
the ‘Child’ stumbles, trips or falls, the ‘Mother’ should be there
to protect, guide and facilitate these new experiences.
Oracle: You may find yourself in this situation as either the
experienced or the inexperienced one, or possibly finding the
‘Mother’ within you guiding your own “inner child”. This Symbol
is also about the way we develop the innocent elements of the
inner self. Our inner qualities, as well as our outer ones, mature
through experience, but it is important to remain aware of the
protection we need to give to this growth. It is also important
to remember to take your time, and to allow development to
occur ‘Step By Step’. To rush because there is a fear of some
danger or failure is more likely to cause a problem than taking
it easy. Mistakes are easily made when we’re approaching
something that we’re unfamiliar with—something that we, or
others, haven’t yet learnt the ‘Steps’ of. Patience and guidance
are extremely necessary in order not to discourage the ‘Small
Child’ who’s learning very important lessons here. There may be
a need to “hang back” whilst everyone else is charging forward;
quick moves and harsh attitudes can be off putting to those in
a vulnerable or less powerful position. Watching and observing
the progress of this situation will reveal how best to deal with it
as various issues arise.
Keywords: The inner child. Guidance and acceptance of those
not so “upwardly mobile”. Training. Careful consideration of
other’s immaturity or failings. Staying with the family in order
to bring up the children. Guardianship and stewardship. Reversals
of roles. Supervising parents. Looking after the younger or the
elder. Taking things one by one. Alzheimer's disease. Handicaps.
Step-by-step progress.
The Caution: Future vision and hope obscured. Exhausted by
constant parental obligation. Not getting, or giving, the help that
one needs. Being bossy and judgmental, thereby missing the joy
inherent in the moment. Lack of supervision or training. Refusing
to grow up. Wanting to be looked after.
Sagittarius
9
Thebestthingaboutthefutureis
thatitcomesonedayatatime.
Abraham Lincoln
Children aren’t happy without
something to ignore,and that’s
what parents were created for.
Ogden Nash
What an elder sees sitting;the
young can’t see standing.
Ibo Proverb
No matter how high one’s
aspirations may be,it must be
achieved step-by-step.
Buddyo Dendo Kyokai
Children,taught either years
beneath their intelligence or
miles wide of relevance to it,or
both:their intellect becomes
hopelessly bewildered,drawn off
its centers,bored,or atrophied.
James Agee
Every time you don’t follow your
inner guidance,you feel a loss of
energy,loss of power,a sense of
spiritual deadness….we need
to be willing to let our intuition
guide us,and then be willing to
follow that guidance directly
and fearlessly.
Shakti Gawain
My mother had a great deal of
trouble with me,but I think she
enjoyed it.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 273>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
250
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A THEATRICAL REPRESENTATION OF
A GOLDEN HAIRED GODDESS OF
OPPORTUNITY
Commentary: ‘A Theatrical Representation of a Golden Haired
Goddess of Opportunity’ is a wonderful image of promise, talent
and possibility. The ‘Theatre’ traditionally represents “escape and
fantasy” for the people in the populace. The audience expects
to be entertained and they hope for something marvelous to
happen. Whether the “storyline” of the play or presentation is
fact or fiction, they will often hang onto every word or movement
made.
Oracle: This Symbol can represent an offer that seems too good to
refuse. It is probably only a reasonable reward for your efforts. You
may want to respond quickly, almost impulsively, but there may be
a need for caution. The temptation may be hard to resist, and it is
most likely an opportunity that is worthwhile, but having a good,
hard look at what’s being ‘Represented’ is probably necessary.
You can still think the situation through if you act quickly. Let
down any barriers or self-critical restrictions and listen to your
heart as well. Try not to overestimate the rewards or outcomes
as these may cloud your consideration. There may indeed be a
great ‘Opportunity’ before you that will have a positive outcome.
Just how grand it is, isn’t really important. This Symbol is also
about presenting something you believe to be a wonderful
opportunity to others. There probably needs to be some form
of performance or presentation made. This may not be a time
for a quiet chat or waiting for others to come to you. You need
to present your idea, and yourself, for an audience. You need to
touch their emotions and show confidence. The best way is to
be honest and clear and come straight from the heart. How can
you advertise or promote yourself or your product so that it gets
the best possible response?
Keywords: Distinguishing reality from theater. Feeling that
the “world is your stage”. Playing out a story. Seeing others as
a gateway to riches or fulfillment. Being “the talent”. Being an
“overnight success”. Glamour and the allure of the media. The
Academy Awards. Autographs of the noted. Seeing opportunity
ahead of its time. Auditions. Promotions.
TheCaution: Propaganda. Constantly chasing “things” that come
to nothing. Being exploited or exploiting others for personal gain.
Giving a deliberate false impression regarding opportunity and
good fortune. Shallow adoration.
Sagittarius
10
A golden key can open any
door.
Proverb
Personality is the glitter that
sends your little gleam across
the footlights and the orchestra
pit into that big black space
where the audience is.
MaeWest
All the world’s a stage and
most of us are desperately
unrehearsed.
Sean O’Casey
It’s one of the tragic ironies of
the theater that only one man
in it can count on steady work is
the night watchman.
Tallulah Bankhead
Sometimes I worry about being
a success in a mediocre world.
LilyTomlin
Ability is of little account
without opportunity.
Napoleon Bonaparte
The bigger the information
media,the less courage and
freedom they allow.Bigness
means weakness.
Eric Sevareid
Vulgarity is,in reality,nothing
but a modern,chic,pert
descendant of the goddess
Dullness.
Dame Edith Sitwell

<<<PAGE 274>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
251
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN THE LEFT SECTION OF AN
ARCHAIC TEMPLE,A LAMP BURNS
IN A CONTAINER SHAPED LIKE A
HUMAN BODY
Commentary: ‘In the Left Section of an Archaic Temple, a
Lamp Burns in a Container Shaped Like a Human Body’ pictures
a need for linking the spirit and the ‘Body’. Sometimes we need
to remember to be “in our bodies” and this Symbol shows the
reward that can come from regarding our body as our ‘Temple’.
Logic is not always involved in this equation; it speaks more of
emotions, spirit and physicality.
Oracle: Watching bodily rhythms can teach us something about
the timing of our biology. There’s a need to eat when we need
to, to sleep and exercise when we need to; to be alive and happy.
The spirit within us can shine out to enliven the spirits in others.
We can somehow amplify light ourselves, like the ‘Lamp that
Burns’, shining outwards, projecting our spirit and personality.
To provide clues to your current situation, it may be a good idea
to light a ‘Lamp’ or a candle and place it to ‘The Left’ of where
you’re sleeping, working, eating or exercising. The ‘Temple’ of
this Symbol implies that there may be a need for peace and quiet
and respect. There may be a feeling that one somehow doesn’t
“belong” in their body. Is someone losing the plot and “leaving
their body” in this situation? Is there a need for grounding
your physical energy? How are you regarding your body and
feeding yourself? Having faith and belief in one’s self can lead to
knowledge and enlightenment. Rituals of many kinds can help
link mind and body so that a healthier you can emerge. This
period may mark an incredible leap forward in understanding
and consciousness.
Keywords: Connecting the left and right sides. Working out,
physical fitness and exercise. Yoga. Grounding reality. Sexuality.
Realizing that body is the same as spirit. Remembering to be
in the body. Light workers. The acceptance of the body and its
functions. Sport and its physical rewards. Metabolic rates. Oil
burners. Gas lamps. Aladdin's lamp.
TheCaution: Worshiping the body at the expense of the intellect,
psyche or spirit. Concentrating exclusively on physical desires
and needs. Needing actual physical evidence to accept anything.
Being caught up in the illusion of the body, the “physical self”.
Sagittarius
11
Every man is the builder of a
temple,called his body,to the
god he worships,after a style
purely his own,nor can he
get off by hammering marble
instead.We are all sculptors and
painters,and our material is our
own flesh and blood and bones.
Henry DavidThoreau
A bodily disease may be but a
symptom of some ailment in
the spiritual past.
Nathaniel Hawthorne
He who knoweth the precepts
by heart,but faileth to practice
them,Is like unto one who
lighteth a lamp and then
shutteth his eyes.
Nagarjuna
If anything is sacred the human
body is sacred.
WaltWhitman
Sometimes our light goes out
but is blown again into flame
by an encounter with another
human being.
Albert Schweitzer
Forthisisthegreaterrorofour
dayinthetreatmentofthe
humanbody.Thatphysiciansfirst
separatethesoulfromthebody.
Plato

<<<PAGE 275>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
252
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FLAG TURNS INTO AN EAGLE;
THE EAGLE INTO A CHANTICLEER
SALUTING THE DAWN
Commentary:‘AFlagTurnsintoanEagle;theEagleintoaChanticleer
Saluting the Dawn’. Although symbols stretch across time and space
with their own vibrations, this image is a particularly American one.
To quote Dane Rudhyar from his book ‘An Astrological Mandala’:
“The ‘Flag’ is the abstract symbol of the nation; it becomes an
“eagle”—another U.S. symbol—when the concept is made alive by
bold and transcendent action. The ‘Eagle’ symbolizes spiritual will
andthepowertorisetothehighestpossiblealtitudeofconsciousness
and purpose. Flying at such an altitude, the ‘Eagle’ is the first living
creature to perceive the rising sun. Having perceived it, it heralds
it—and by so doing is identified with the crowing ‘Chanticleer’, who
had convinced himself that his resonant cry was responsible for the
rise of the sun and the coming of the new day”.
Oracle: This is a time when our highest ideals can be felt deeply and
proudlyandasanexpressionofspiritualpurityallthewaytopridein
our selves and our nation. You may find that you are moved to burst
forth with expressions or declarations of your higher self. Any issue
that is really worthwhile and “centered” will be seen and heard in
the clear light of day. However, you may need to be wary of forcing
your opinions on others—especially on those who disagree or have
a different view of things. Although it may be difficult to restrain the
forward momentum contained here, there’s a need to be cautious
of going overboard with enthusiasm in the company of others. This
can alienate people and cause distrust. Having said that, if there has
been something you’ve wanted to do or say but have felt held back,
now’s the time to go for it. The ‘Dawn’ reveals that a new day and
the possibility of a new life is coming, and with it ideals that have
to be allowed for, spoken about and expressed in life.
Keywords: Declared idealism. Trumpeting ideals. National pride.
Peak experiences. Flags. Symbols of strength, unity and power.
Truths. The pomp and ceremony of big political displays. Issues
of nationhood. Issues of world domination. Elevated views and
perspectives. Forceful voices. Reaching for the highest plane.
Nobility and pride. Successful outcomes. National anthems. New
empires. Messages from the president.
The Caution: Assuming one is right only because of might or
power or because one can say it the loudest. Propaganda. Lording
it over others. Seeing other “nations” as being lesser. Loud voices.
Bullying.
Sagittarius
12
Thoughtsandemotionsareonly
momentary.Standupright,speak
thythoughts,declarethetruth
thouhast,thatallmayshare;
Bebold,proclaimiteverywhere:
Theyonlylivewhodare.
Lewis Morris
Vision without action is a
daydream.Action without
vision is a nightmare.
Japanese Proverb
Freedom is the sure possession
of those alone who have the
courage to defend it.
Pericles
There should be an Emperor
Fabulous,don’t you think?
Eddie Izzard
Success is a personal
standard—reaching for the
highest that is in us—becoming
all that we can be.
Zig Ziglar
The chasm between the
principles upon which this
Government was founded,in
which it still professes to believe,
and those which are daily
practiced under the protection
of the flag,yawn wide and deep.
Mary ChurchTerrell

<<<PAGE 276>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
253
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WIDOW’S PAST IS BROUGHT TO
LIGHT
Commentary: A ‘Widow’s Past is Brought to Light’ speaks of things
coming out of the ‘Past’ for people to see and learn about. There’s
a story or a situation from the ‘Past’ that is finally being revealed.
Something may have been known to exist but exactly what it was
hasn’t been made clear. Now, there’s been an event, and something
has been revealed; a story or situation from the ‘Past’.
Oracle:Youmayfindthatthe‘Past’catchesupwithyou,orsomeone
you know, at this time. Although there may be sympathetic feelings
in the hearts and minds of those around, somebody may not like
what is being shown or revealed. This needs to be handled with
care. Somebody’s issues, history, deeds or personality have now,
or will soon, come ‘To Light’. This may be rather confronting or
upsetting and it can take time to adjust to this new information.
It often causes us to have to look at something, or someone, or a
relationship, in a new “Light”. As this Symbol pictures a ‘Widow’,
often there’s a feeling that the situation is one with a long history
or is rather old, even possibly outworn, in some way. Issues were
probably previously left in the dark or “in the closet”, suppressed
by someone or at the very least forgotten about. Some may think it
would have been better if these things had been left undisturbed
and not ‘Brought to Light’. Dwelling on issues from the ‘Past’ can
lead to the loss of joy in the present, so there needs to be careful
thought about just where you direct your attention. However, a
healing is often made possible by things being revealed. Try lighting
a candle, or a special ‘Light’, and allow illumination to pour over the
situation. This can cast new ‘Light’ and understanding and allow
you, and others, to banish the shadows of the ‘Past’. Further, often
what was considered a “scandal” in former times is now nothing
much of consequence and can be washed away rather easily.
Keywords: Unveiling and exposing—or creating a new and
vibrant beginning. Getting rid of yesterday’s darkness. Looking
back to revision attitudes. Being freed for new opportunities. The
“scales” falling from one’s eyes. Reasons as to why relationships
have failed. Remembering. Past life memories. Things being found
or discovered. Wills. Inheritances. Death certificates. Burying the
past. Pensions. Insurance policies.
TheCaution: Old stories best forgotten. Dead-end feelings hanging
around. Gossip and family secrets that hurt and otherwise cause
harm. Feelings rehashed detrimental to stability. Someone being
caught out. Bearing the weight of secrets.
Sagittarius
13
I wept not,so to stone within I
grew.
Dante
“Widow”is a harsh and hurtful
word.It comes from the Sanskrit
and it means“empty.”I have
been empty too long.
Lynn Caine
The secret to life is that there is
no secret.
Anon
None are so fond of secrets as
those who do not mean to keep
them.
Charles Caleb Colton
Truth,when not sought after,
rarely comes to light.
OliverWendell Holmes
What the eye doesn’t see,the
heart doesn’t grieve over.
Anon
Make it a rule of life never to
regret and never to look back.
Regret is an appalling waste
of energy;you can’t build on it;
it’s only good for wallowing in.
Katherine Mansfield
Every family has a skeleton in
the cupboard.
Traditional Proverb

<<<PAGE 277>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
254
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AVAST PANORAMA OF SAND ANDTIME IS
UNFOLDING;THE PYRAMIDS AND SPHINX
INTHEIR GLORY RISE BEFORETHE EYE
Commentary: The ‘Pyramids and Sphinx’ are a picture of grandeur
and history. They stand as testimonials to days long gone. The
Pyramidswerebuiltsome4,500yearsago,butprobablynot,asmany
believe,byslaves.Evidencesuggeststhatsocialorganizationbuiltthe
‘Pyramids’. The ‘Pyramids’ at Giza were the foundation of the first
nation state and the beginning of modern civilization. To participate
in the building of the king’s ‘Pyramid’ was an honor that was sought
byfamiliesrightacrossEgypt.People,goodsandlivestockcamefrom
allcornersofthecountry.Theworkerswererespected,educatedand
healediftheywereinjured.ThisSymbolcanspeakofanylargeedifice,
especially those that seem to hold some mystery as to how or why
they were built. Ancient history is full of such human and spiritual
wonders:Stonehenge,thegreatstonewallsofMacchuPicchuandthe
Great Wall of China. They provide intriguing puzzles into the human
mind and just how vast human accomplishment can be.
Oracle: There may be a feeling of the need to establish some type
of monument. It can be something that makes a huge impression,
something that won’t easily be forgotten. Organization of people
and labor towards a common goal on any scale can lead to great
accomplishments. You may need an architect or a tour guide, and
inner wisdom, as this will guide you. The resources that are available
can bring re-evaluations to current dilemmas. However, slave labor
hasveryfewrealrewards.Bewaryofmerelybeingusedforsomeone’s
grand agendas. Further, matters could have a lack of clarity about
them. Is something in this situation so big or so difficult, it can hardly
be approached? Is it really becoming outworn or outlived? Are you
seeing the huge gulfs between the haves and the have nots?
Keywords: Ancient histories and mysteries. The power of the past
affecting today’s world. Spiritual ancestry. Mysteries that enrich.
Decoding. Magicians and prophets. Secret messages or tricks of
perception? Majestic properties. Riddles. Ingenuity. Plans and the
executing of them. Egyptian things. Levels of power. Pyramid
marketing. Taxes. The rich versus the poor. The American monetary
system. World finances. The World Trade Centre. Masonic mysteries.
Cement, sand, plaster. Tools. Architects. Builders.
TheCaution:Treasuresrobbedbythegreedy.Monumentsthatbelittle
other,lesserachievements.Aloofnessthroughperceivedsuperiority.
Proclaiming treasures from the past more worthy, or grander, than
present perceptions allow. Slave labor. Anonymity of the masses.
Sagittarius
14
History,although sometimes
made up of the few acts of the
great,is more often shaped by
the many acts of the small.
MarkTwain
History is the version of past
events that people have decided
to agree upon.
Napoleon
When Moses was alive,the
pyramids were a thousand years
old ...Here people learned to
measure time by a calendar,to
plot the stars by astronomy ...
Here they developed that most
awesome of all ideas—the idea
of eternity.
Walter Cronkite
All we know is still infinitely less
than all that remains unknown.
William Harvey
Nobody even knows what a
“henge”is.
Eddie Izzard—on Stonehenge
Order and simplification are the
first steps toward the mastery of
a subject.
Thomas Mann
The hallmark of our age is the
tension between aspirations and
sluggish institutions.
JohnW.Gardner

<<<PAGE 278>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
255
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE GROUND HOG LOOKING FOR
ITS SHADOW ON GROUND HOG DAY
Commentary: ‘The Ground Hog Looking For its Shadow on
Ground Hog Day’, by its reactions and movements, provides clues
as to whether winter would continue or spring will come with its
warmth and rewards. As ‘Ground Hog Day’ is in February in the
northern hemisphere, it symbolizes a time of cold, snow and the
stiff breezes of winter. Although more fable than real, the ‘Ground
Hog’ is said to be able to sense whether there’s a change in the air.
If he feels spring approaching, he gives a sign so others may know
and anticipate it themselves. The ‘Ground Hog’ is somewhat of a
“star” on ‘Ground Hog Day’, as people are watching him, wondering
what he will signal. There is a lot of projection happening here as
the animal is not consciously doing anything.
Oracle: You may need some sign to give you insight into the future.
The solution to your question is close by and easy to perceive. It is
based in your normal environment and relationships. Don’t focus
on things continuing to be hard or difficult, as this can lead to it
actually happening. Don’t read too much into things, as they may
not be as they seem. However, acknowledging your ‘Shadow’, and
yourprojectionsandperceptions,willbringtheclaritythat’ssought.
Reading books, watching movies or television, hearing the words of
a song, observing everyday life and the people around can remind
you of things that have happened in your life. However, continually
or compulsively looking for signs of assurance when they can be
readily available on the physical plane can lead to losing your way,
and worrying too much about what you cause in your life. There
can be difficulty infinding rest, or sleep,when one looks continually
at their life and the effects that one creates. Are you relying on
messages from the past? People may be with you, or this may be a
lonely journey. Welcome the spring, and don’t look back!
Keywords: Looking back, reading the signs. Divination and other
systems of inquiry. Seeing society as being to blame. People having
a good look at how they seem to others. Wondering how others
perceive you and picture you. Prophets that can tell the “weather”
ahead of time. Predictions. Prognosticating. Welcoming an early
spring. Scrutinizing objectives and possible outcomes. Looking to
nature for clues.
The Caution: Being scared to act without some message of
confirmation. People (or society) looking for someone else to blame
for conditions. Relying on the same solutions without consideration
of changes. Blizzards and the cold.
Sagittarius
15
Nice going boys,you’re playing
yesterday’s tape.
Ground Hog Day
Life can only be understood
backwards;but it must be lived
forwards.
Soren Kierkegaard
The measure of a man’s real
character is what he would do
if he knew he would never be
found out.
Thomas B.Macaulay
Does Phil feel lucky?
Ground Hog Day
If you hate a person,you hate
something in him that is part
of yourself.What isn’t part of
ourselves doesn’t disturb us.
Hermann Hesse
The life that is unexamined is
not worth living.
Plato
A little man often casts a long
shadow.
Italian Proverb
If you stand straight do not fear
a crooked shadow.
Chinese Proverb
He has great tranquility of
heart who cares neither for the
praises nor the fault-finding in
men.
Honore de Balzac

<<<PAGE 279>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
256
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
SEA GULLS FLY AROUND A SHIP
LOOKING FOR FOOD
Commentary: ‘Sea Gulls Fly Around a Ship Looking For Food’
symbolizes the search for sustenance in the form of handouts
from the sailors, or the fish that get stirred up in the wash of the
‘Ship’. The ‘Seagull’ often has no need of loyalty to anyone but to
him or her self, although there may be young ones who need to
share what food or other nourishment can be found.
Oracle: This pictures a situation of dependence, sometimes co-
dependence. Don’t look to others or have others look to you for
opportunities and nourishment, for someone may miss the chance
of being creative and truly independent. Continually looking and
waiting for one’s ship to come in, in order to be fed or otherwise
looked after and sheltered, can be a tiring responsibility and one
that isn’t always appreciated by others. Look carefully, is someone
using someone? If there is no nourishment, food or resources
such as money, to be found where one is looking, there may be
a need to seek elsewhere. There may also be the need to watch
the situation very closely to see what is really going on. If you
are a ‘Sea Gull’, hovering around waiting to see what you can
easily find or get for nothing, you will probably need to move
fast in order to take advantage of opportunities when they pop
up. For one thing, they may not last long, for another; there may
be others that are on the lookout for the same things. If you are
the ‘Ship’ the ‘Seagulls’ are circling, be wary of the motives of
others wanting things from you. It can as if people are waiting
for things to be “thrown overboard”, or for things to fall off the
‘Ship’. Who’s looking for scraps? Are they worth it? People who
settle for very little often find that very little is what they end
up getting.
Keywords: Losing sight of alternative possibilities and going for
the easy “feed”. Issues of dependence. Diminishing one’s essential
worth while trying to please a specific need. Being opportunistic.
Settling for the small things in life. Scalpers. Jettisoning scraps.
Leftovers. The rewards and pitfalls of “meal tickets”. Issues of
social security. The homeless.
The Caution: Waiting for scraps that may not even be worth
it or may never come. Losing the opportunity to care for one’s
self in an independent manner. Giving away one’s power. Being
opportunistic at the expense of others. Being ripped off. People
“kissing and running”. Users and abusers. Having satellites.
Hovering for scraps.
Sagittarius
16
We need to learn to set our
course by the stars,not by the
lights of every passing ship.
Omar Nelson Bradley
When the seagulls follow the
trawler,it is because they think
sardines will be thrown into the
sea.
Eric Cantona—Commenting
on the press
Where the carcass is,there shall
the eagles be.
Proverb
I eat like a vulture.
Unfortunately the resemblance
doesn’t end there.
Groucho Marx
A man with a surplus can
control circumstances,but
a man without a surplus is
controlled by them,and often
has no opportunity to exercise
judgment.
Harvey S.Firestone
A pessimist is one who makes
difficulties of his opportunities;
an optimist is one who makes
opportunities of his difficulties.
Reginald B.Mansell
A wise man will make more
opportunities than he finds.
Sir Francis Bacon

<<<PAGE 280>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
257
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EASTER SUNRISE SERVICE
DRAWS A LARGE CROWD
Commentary: ‘An Easter Sunrise Service Draws a Large Crowd’
is an image of people coming together in the early hours of the
morning, at ‘Sunrise’, to celebrate the joy of the resurrection of
Jesus Christ. Our souls are renewed with the beauty of spring and
the celebration of the resurrection of the Savior, Jesus. We can
find hope and our faith deepened during this significant event
in the life of Christ. Although 'Easter' is a Christian festival, this
situation can apply to any creed where rebirth and redemption
is the path.
Oracle: Whatever the situation facing you, this is a time of
spiritual rebirth where you, and others, can rise above the failings
of the past into a whole new beginning. Coming out of doubt and
despair will enable everyone to concentrate on what is possible
in this new era. As this ‘Easter Sunrise Service Draws a Large
Crowd’, it seems that there is, or needs to be, an unwavering faith
in communal spiritual values, although there can be a feeling
of society offering up something or someone to sacrifice or to
purge the guilt or the sins of the past. We need to move past the
more difficult issues or the problems of our histories, particularly
issues where someone felt a sense of failure, loss, despair, betrayal
or unfaithfulness. Forgetting past hurts and insults in favor of
enjoying the reality of life in the here and now will lift everyone’s
spirits. However, it may indeed be possible to resurrect ideas,
situations or people that long since felt lost, or indeed, bring
them back from “the dead”. The present needs to be seen in the
light of a new era, with the difficulties of the past being laid to
rest for good. Join with others in expressions of joy as this can
lift everyone’s spirits. Rituals performed with ceremony, or going
to a church or temple can reconnect you spiritually.
Keywords: Performing deeds with reverence, respect and a
sense of celebration. Cohesive communal expressions of faith.
The dawning of a new era. Church services. Dawn services. The
community gathering for a common purpose. Resurrections and
rebirths. Revivals. The need for faith in a bright future. Devotion.
Worship.
The Caution: Obsession with the ceremony rather than the true
purpose or ideal. Feeling unable to lift one’s spirit. Loss and
shame of the past clouding the possibilities of today’s reality.
Disillusionment around issues to do with the Church.
Sagittarius
17
Do not abandon yourselves
to despair.We are the Easter
people and hallelujah is our
song.
Pope John Paul II
I come not to entertain you
with worldly festivities but to
arouse your sleeping memory
of immortality.
ParamahansaYogananda
The act of divine worship is the
inestimable privilege of man,
the only created being who
bows in humility and adoration.
Hosea Ballou
But every act in consequence
of our faith,strengthens faith.
Anna Letitia Barbauld
Do not let your deeds belie your
words,lest when you speak
in church someone may say
to himself,‘Why do you not
practice what you preach?’
Saint Jerome
Everyone ought to worship
God according to his own
inclinations,and not to be
constrained by force.
Flavius Josephus
Every day people are straying
away from the church and
going back to God.
Lenny Bruce

<<<PAGE 281>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
258
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TINY CHILDREN PLAYING IN
SUNBONNETS
Commentary: ‘Tiny Children Playing in Sunbonnets’ is an image
that brings to mind childlike, carefree fun in a protective, caring
environment. The ‘Children’ are protected from the strong and
sometimes fierce rays of the sun by wearing ‘Sunbonnets’. We
can assume that their mothers or other carers have put them on
for them. They don’t have to worry about sunburn and being
exposed to the elements, all they need to do is 'Play'. Although
they may interact with the other ‘Children’, some may just play
their own individual games side-by-side with each other.
Oracle: In your situation, someone may be in need of protection
at the moment, and it is most likely for their own good, as long
as there is not the sense of being “overprotected” and insulated
from having to be responsible for themselves. Without having to
worry about complicated details and difficult consequences, the
feeling of a sense of security and safety can lead to more carefree
and playful moments. Don’t be distracted by efforts being made
by others on your behalf, sometimes we need to be shielded by
others from harmful elements. However, sometimes we also need
to feel or intuit our way through the surface appearance of what’s
really going on. There can be a sense of having to keep some
emotion or anger away, so as not to disturb or frighten others, or
ourselves, but this may lead to having the “blinkers” or "blinders"
on and not seeing life as it truly is. Is there a sense of naivety here
and missing the real point of life? Is someone being kept in the
dark, or kept from seeing reality? On the other hand, you may
need to look after others and ensure that their well-being is at
the top of the list of priorities. Approaching this question with a
childlike, carefree attitude, whilst all the while keeping a true eye
on the situation, will probably bring the message that’s needed.
Whatever, there’s a need to remember to play and have fun.
Keywords: Care taken with small beginnings. Protection or
blinkering? Propaganda that hides more severe life realities.
Censorship. Innocence. Being treated like a child. Mollycoddling.
Sunblocks and sunscreens. Screens that filter.
TheCaution: Overprotection by institutionalized procedures that
can lead to not being able to see the whole picture. “Organized
religion” and it’s blinding of society to the true joy within and
without. Infantile behavior. Being left in the dark without a clue
as to what’s going on. Naivety. Being overshadowed by ego. Abuse
and neglect.
Sagittarius
18
Once you bring life into the
world,you must protect it.We
must protect it by changing the
world.
ElieWiesel
With each passage of human
growth we must shed a
protective structure [like a
hardy crustacean].We are left
exposed and vulnerable—but
also yeasty and embryonic
again,capable of stretching in
ways we hadn’t known before.
Gail Sheehy
Won’t the new‘Suggested for
Mature Audience’protect our
youngsters from such films? I
don’t believe so.I know many
forty-five-year old men with the
mentalities of six-year-olds,and
my feeling is that they should
not see such pictures,either.
ShirleyTemple Black
Let children read whatever they
want and then talk about it
with them.If parents and kids
can talk together,we won’t
have as much censorship
because we won’t have as
much fear.
Judy Blume
We all live in the protection of
certain cowardices which we
call our principles.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 282>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
259
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
PELICANS DISTURBED BY THE
GARBAGE OF PEOPLE MOVE THEIR
YOUNG TO A NEW HABITAT
Commentary: ‘Pelicans Disturbed By the Garbage of People
Move Their Young to a New Habitat’. ‘Pelicans’ in Christian art
are a symbol of charity; they are also an emblem of Jesus Christ
by “whose blood we are healed’”. This comes from the myth that
‘Pelicans’ feed their young with their blood which arose from
the fact that the parent ‘Pelican’ transfers softened food from the
large bag under its bill to its ‘Young’.
Oracle: This Symbol often pictures the realization that conditions
are changing and you, your family (and sometimes friends) don’t
feel safe and secure in your environment. You may need to move
to a new situation that can provide a better way of life with more
nourishment and less danger. This can also refer to an inner
withdrawal from situations that feel threatening or unsure. It can
be a case of having to leave homes, places or people that have
outlived their usefulness or relevance in your life. A change of
heart and mind can lead to new beginnings, with the past being
left behind. Pollution or ‘Garbage’ on any level can lead to a sense
of unease in one’s environment and the fear of how one can
cope in the future. There may be a need to actually pick up one’s
possessions and move out of the path of some form of danger. If
your environment is “polluted” by negative people, attitudes or
some other form of debilitation or ‘Garbage’, is it worth staying
there? Are threats being taken seriously enough? This “danger”
can manifest on any level; physical, emotional or spiritual. It can
erupt as psychic or emotional outbursts that can be threatening
or toxic; rubbish that is difficult to contain, manage or maneuver
around. If you don’t feel safe in your environment, how can you
expect you and yours to grow and flourish?
Keywords: Concerns with survival. The endeavor to achieve
mental, physical or emotional well-being or peace. Noise and
other irritants that make life difficult. Looking out for the safety
and security of one’s children, home or creative ventures. Feeling
unsafe. Conditions being insecure and unpredictable. Having
nowhere to rest.
The Caution: Mess and rubbish left around. Not being prepared
to compromise or cohabit. People not being able to live together.
Fouling of one’s nest. Things are being done “for your own good”
regardless of what you want. Noise driving people out. Leases
running out.
Sagittarius
19
Just as there’s garbage that
pollutes the Potomac River,
there is garbage polluting
our culture.We need an
Environmental Protection
Agency to clean it up.
Patrick Buchanan
It is an ill bird that fouls its own
nest.
Romanian Proverb
SYLPH,n.An immaterial but
visible being that inhabited the
air when the air was an element
and before it was fatally
polluted with factory smoke,
sewer gas and similar products
of civilization.
Ambrose Bierce
You must not lose faith in
humanity.Humanity is an
ocean;if a few drops of the
ocean are dirty,the ocean does
not become dirty.
Mahatma Gandhi
Lies,injustice,and hypocrisy
are a part of every ordinary
community.Most people
achieve a sort of protective
immunity,a kind of callousness,
toward them.If they didn’t,they
couldn’t endure.
Nella Larsen

<<<PAGE 283>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
260
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN WINTER PEOPLE ARE CUTTING
ICE FROM A FROZEN POND FOR
SUMMER USE
Commentary: ‘In Winter People Are Cutting Ice From a Frozen
Pond for Summer Use’ speaks of the value of planning ahead so
people can have their needs provided for. Food, water, materials,
all kinds of provisions may be more available some times than at
others and it is sensible to ensure supply of what will be needed
in the future.
Oracle: It may be necessary to take into account the reality of
seasonal fluctuations and the resulting times of scarcity. This
Symbol shows the importance of thinking about what will be
needed or useful in the future. Or at least, making the best
possible use of available materials to provide what is needed when
it is needed. Storage of things, or adaptations of available materials
for a “rainy day” can ensure that life will be easier to manage. This
can point to storing food, water, money, or other types of goods.
Money can be saved by having a savings plan for retirement.
Things such as pension funds and savings can be a good idea
as there is no way of knowing exactly what your resources will
be later in life. By saving some kind of resource, and allowing
for shifts in time and seasonal variations, you’ll have what you
need. Also, making building repairs and renovations to allow for
fluctuations in the weather or for varying atmospheric changes
can also lead to an increased level of safety and comfort. Watch
to see if you have lost touch with your emotions by creating an
icy barrier to future possibilities or eventualities. Also, someone
may be working toward appropriating or plundering someone
else’s resources or savings. Any threats to future happiness or
success can be overcome without great difficulty, just a little
awareness, planning and action.
Keywords:Overcomingdifficultiesaheadoftimethroughcreative
solutions to problems. Strategies for survival in harder times.
Stocking up and storing supplies. Savings and funds. Pension
plans. Retirement plans. Work and renovation. Planning for
changes in external or internal realities. Seeing shortages ahead
of time. Snow. Ice. Freezing conditions. Divorce settlements.
The Caution: Stoic acceptance of difficulties. Not seeing ahead
of the times. Failing to plan for the future and just hoping that
it will work out. Sitting on your hands instead of working for
future possibilities. People storing up hurts or insults for later.
Extortion.
Sagittarius
20
It wasn’t raining when Noah
built the ark.
Howard Ruff
The rich man has his ice in the
summer and the poor man gets
his in the winter.
Scottish Proverb
Some people are making
such thorough plans for rainy
days that they aren’t enjoying
today’s sunshine.
William Feather
Discover a well before you are
thirsty.
Chinese Proverb
A penny saved is a penny earned.
Proverb
For age and want save while
you may:no morning sun lasts
a whole day.
Romanian Proverb
They that have got a good store
of butter may lay it thick on
their bread.
Romanian Proverb
If I had 8 hours to chop down
a tree,I’d spend 6 sharpening
my axe.
Abraham Lincoln
In the depth of winter,I finally
learned that within me there
lay an invincible summer.
Albert Camus

<<<PAGE 284>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
261
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHILD AND A DOG WEARING
BORROWED EYEGLASSES
Commentary: ‘A Child and a Dog Wearing Borrowed Eyeglasses”
shows play, impersonations and free-flowing perceptions of fun
and enjoyment with others. The ‘Eyeglasses’ can symbolize
intelligence or a thoughtful nature and by wearing them one can
give the impression of having these attributes. ‘A Child and a Dog’
wearing the ‘Eyeglasses’ shows that the ‘Child’, who may be you or
someone else in the situation, does not care what the ‘Eyeglasses’
are all about. By giving the ‘Eyeglasses’ to the ‘Dog’, the ‘Child’
shows that he doesn’t know, or worry about, what intelligence
or wisdom truly are. For the moment, he wants them to act like
grown-ups, seemingly smart and in control of their lives.
Oracle: Perhaps someone is pretending to be more in control
or smarter than they are, or is this a situation of innocent play?
Whatever the situation, this can work to make a consciousness
shift. By changing both your appearance and your perceptions,
you can create some new understanding of your dreams, or
understanding of how life can be, and it can help you to grow
into it. People in this situation may have no idea where they are
headed in life, or what they are doing with it now, but, with some
play, some fun and light relief can be had in the process. Look to
see whether someone is trying to fool you with appearances or
by inappropriate action or confusing behavior. Make sure that
everyone is looking at things through the right “lenses” in order to
be able to see what’s really going on. “Looking through” and into
things can reveal layers of meaning that you wouldn’t otherwise
observe. Eyestrain can occur, especially if one doesn’t want to
see what’s actually going on, or desires a pretend scenario rather
than facing reality.
Keywords: Emulation leading to actualization. The rewards of
make-believe. Dog obedience classes and training. Pantomimes.
Dealing with life through play or fantasy. Difficulty in
understanding each other. The perception each has of the other.
Spontaneous and carefree creativity. Cartooning and clowning.
Having the “eyes” to see. Glasses of all kinds.
The Caution: Deliberately fooling with false impressions. Taking
on masks to hide real intentions. The “blind leading the blind”.
Pretending to be something that one isn’t. Not seeing people
or things for who, what or how they really are. Getting lost in
abstractions. Goofing around too much. Play-acting to avoid the
truth. Not having the eyes to see.
Sagittarius
21
Rose-colored glasses are never
made in bifocals.Nobody wants
to read the small print in dreams.
Ann Landers
The dog is a yes animal.Very
popular with people who can’t
afford a yes man.
Robertson Davies
Study hard and you might grow
up to be President.But let’s face
it:Even then,you’ll never make
as much money as your dog.
George Bush—after learning
Millie,his dog,made $889,176
in book royalties
Man is the only animal that
learns by being hypocritical.He
pretends to be polite and then,
eventually,he becomes polite.
Jean Kerr
In our society those who are in
reality superior in intelligence
can be accepted by their fellows
only if they pretend they are not.
Marya Mannes
The only good in pretending
is the fun we get out of
fooling ourselves that we fool
somebody.
BoothTarkington
There’s none so blind as those
who won’t see.
Old Saying

<<<PAGE 285>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
262
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHINESE LAUNDRY
Commentary: A ‘Chinese Laundry’ is pictured. The ‘Chinese
Laundry’ was once a place where a lot of the work was done
laboriously by hand in cramped and difficult conditions, and for
long hours. The Chinese did the work that other people did not
want to do, indeed, would often refuse to do. There was often
a sense of alienation which was made worse by language and
cultural barriers. Although the wages were low, people would
work hard side-by-side, not asking for much, but being glad of
the opportunity to make an honest day’s wage for a good day’s
work. There was also the opportunity to make a life in the
“new world”, in America. In those early days, and even today,
discrimination was often directed towards foreign people who
worked in menial occupations. However, if they withdrew their
labor, whole sections of the community would collapse
Oracle: You may find that you, are not being taken seriously and
are expected to perform in a stereotypical way. You may also
have closed your own mind to other options for employment, or
your life’s work, that could be more rewarding to you and your
community. Be careful not to shut yourself away in a situation
that will end up binding you to it. Make sure that you aren’t
putting yourself, or others, in a box that they can’t escape from.
This Symbol can bring all sorts of prejudices to the surface, be
they social, racial or otherwise. This can also picture a situation
where a few people are working closely together, speaking the
same language. Even in this there can be alienation and loneliness.
Remember to perform everyday tasks with reverence and see how
it can transform your feelings and experience of life. Assessing
how “clean” your act is may bring surprising results. Further, how
much do you need to clean up for everyone around you?
Keywords: Restrictive expectations. Relations with others
because of social duty. Performing tasks. Mediocrity, or the fear
of it. Washing machines and dryers. Money and other laundering.
Laws and legislation based on social and racial inequality. Issues
of belonging. Cleaning up for others. The search for purity.
Institutions that inhibit individuality. Convents. Stereotyping
people. Work and the rewards it should bring.
The Caution: Giving in to prejudice. Self-inflicted sense of
inferiority that can lead to missed opportunities for relating.
Feeling trapped with no way out. Not being taken seriously.
Doing menial jobs with little reward or real return. Slave labor.
Lack of individual identity. Shutters to keep the world out.
Sagittarius
22
I believe you are your work.
Don’t trade the stuff of your life,
time,for nothing more than
dollars.That’s a rotten bargain.
Rita Mae Brown
Big jobs usually go to the men
who prove their ability to
outgrow small ones.
RalphWaldo Emerson
To open a business is very easy;
to keep it open is very difficult.
Chinese Proverb
I foundedWang Laboratories
...to show that Chinese
could excel at things other
than running laundries and
restaurants.
AnWang
The Chinese use two brush
strokes to write the word
‘crisis.’One brush stroke
stands for danger;the other
for opportunity.In a crisis,be
aware of the danger — but
recognize the opportunity.
Richard M.Nixon
An income tax form is like a
laundry list—either way you
lose your shirt.
Fred Allen
The world is full of willing
people;some willing to work,
the rest willing to let them.
Robert Frost

<<<PAGE 286>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
263
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GROUP OF IMMIGRANTS
FULFILLING THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR ENTERING A NEW COUNTRY
Commentary: ‘A Group of Immigrants Fulfilling the Requirements
for Entering a New Country’ shows people who are leaving the
old behind in order to pursue a new life in a new place. They may
be happy, hopeful and jubilant about this voyage to the unfamiliar
or they may be somewhat sad, bedraggled and lost, it all depends
on their individual circumstances. They may find themselves
being assessed by others to see how “worthy” they are of being
accepted into this ‘New Country’; just what are their qualifications
for acceptance?
Oracle: This is a time of new possibility, the hope for better things
and a new way of life. You may find yourself preparing to venture
into new territory for the promise that is offered. There may need
to be adjustments about the way you communicate your thoughts
and ideas. Be receptive to this new way of life, as you’ll learn a
lot. Learning how to communicate will help you to succeed in
this new territory, whether this be a new home, new country,
new job, new relationship, etc., and can help dispel any feelings of
alienation and loneliness. Perhaps there is a need to let go of past
experiences or people in order to move on in life. Letting go of
the hindering and stifling elements of the past will help transport
hope into the “new world” that is opening up. How do you feel
in this new environment? Do you feel strangely yet completely at
home, or do you feel like a fish out of water? Give thanks for what
is being released from the past and prepared for the new to come.
It’s bound to be challenging, yet rewarding!
Keywords: Reorientation of selfhood. Needing to change things
in order to accept a new reality. The necessity of learning new
languages or customs to fit in. Visas, passports, papers. Illegal
immigrants. Boat people. Customs officials and regulations.
Baggage and luggage. Shipping. Qualifications and certifications.
Identification. Asylum. Immigration officers. Papers and
qualifications that include or exclude. Refugees. Laws. Borders. Ellis
Island. Throwing away the known in pursuit of the unknown.
The Caution: Entering new situations with inflexible traditions.
Issues of social or racial prejudice, or the suspicion of it. Red
tape getting in the way of enjoying life. Those not living up to
requirements. Not getting successfully through the paperwork.
Being untrue to oneself in order to be accepted. Being rejected
or sent back.
Sagittarius
23
All adventures,especially into
new territory,are scary.
Sally Ride
Remember that happiness is a
way of travel,not a destination.
Roy Goodman
Here at our sea-washed,
sunset gates shall stand a
mighty woman with a torch,
whose flame Is the imprisoned
lightning,and her name Mother
of Exiles.
Emma Lazarus
Give me your tired,your poor,
your huddled masses yearning
to breathe free.
Emma Lazarus—Verse
inscribed on the Statue of
Liberty.
I would place all the Indians of
Nevada on ships in our harbor,
take them to NewYork and
land them there as immigrants,
that they might be received
with open arms ...and thus
placed beyond the necessity of
reservation help.
SarahWinnemucca
A map of the world that does
not include Utopia is not worth
even glancing at,for it leaves
out the one country at which
Humanity is always landing.
OscarWilde

<<<PAGE 287>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
264
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BLUEBIRD,A SIGN OF GOOD LUCK
AND HAPPINESS,IS STANDING AT
THE DOOR OF THE HOUSE
Commentary: ‘A Bluebird, A Sign Of Good Luck and Happiness, Is
Standing At The Door Of The House’. The ‘Bluebird’ is often seen
as an omen of good fortune and ‘Happiness’, and it is pictured
‘Standing at the Door of the House’ which shows ‘Good Luck’ is
coming into ‘The House’ or headed your way in some sense.
Oracle: You may soon feel that you are in a time of natural,
positive, good luck. Can you see and feel it? Responding with your
higher hopes for a happy and productive life will ensure that the
‘Bluebird of Good Luck and Happiness’ knows where to settle.
Positive attitudes and hope for the future will see you moving
forward unhindered, and these becoming reality. Observing
birds in nature or in your own environment can bring reminder
of how wonderful life can be. Birds are seen to be agents of
spiritual messages and watching them go about their lives and
hearing their calls can bring a sense of stronger connectedness
to our everyday lives. Do you see or hear the ‘Blue Bird?’ If you
have not paid much attention or noticed them before you may
be surprised by just how many birds are around you. Are you
allowing happiness to come knocking at your ‘Door’? If you can’t
feel it yet, meditate on the Symbol of the ‘Bluebird’ bringing
‘Good Luck and Happiness’ as life is sure to shift in some way.
You could hang up a picture of a ‘Bluebird’, or some other bird,
as a token of your willingness to receive this ‘Good Luck and
Happiness’. This ‘Bluebird’ may actually be a person who turns
up in your life, or is already known to you. How lucky do you
feel? How content with your life are you? Bring happiness into
your home, take a moment to count your blessings—see how
blessed you truly are.
Keywords: Calmness and rewards. Promise (or promises) of
‘Happiness’. Love and happiness available by acknowledging
its presence. Real estate, house boundaries. Reminders of joy.
Cottages and picket fences. Waiting for invitations to enter. Omens
of good luck. Blessings. Front doors and back doors.
The Caution: Denying happiness or good news. Feeling that the
grass is always greener somewhere else. Putting on false shows
of happiness for all to see. Thinking that buying things will make
one’s life happier. Wanting what’s not available.
Sagittarius
24
Faith is a bluebird you see from
afar.It’s real and sure as the first
evening star.You can’t touch it
or buy it or wrap it up tight.But
it’s there just the same making
things turn out right.
Margery Sharp
Spread love everywhere you
go:first of all in your own house.
Give love to your children,to
your wife or husband,to a
next-door neighbor… Let no
one ever come to you without
leaving better or happier.
MotherTeresa
When one door of happiness
closes another door opens,but
often we look so long at the
closed door that we don’t see
the one that has opened.
Helen Keller
Hold fast to dreams,For if
dreams die Life is a broken-
winged birdThat cannot fly.
Langston Hughes
Good fences make good
neighbors.
American Proverb
I am a marvelous housekeeper.
Every time I leave a man I keep
his house.
Zsa Zsa Gabor

<<<PAGE 288>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
265
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHUBBY LITTLE RICH BOY RIDES
UPON A HOBBYHORSE
Commentary: ‘A Chubby Little Rich Boy Rides Upon a Hobbyhorse’.
Webster's dictionary defines a ‘Hobby Horse’ as “1) a strong active
horse, of middle size 2) A stick, often with the head or figure of a
horse, on which boys make believe to ride 3) A subject or plan upon
which one is constantly setting off; a favorite and ever-recurring
theme of discourse, thought, or effort; that which occupies one’s
attention unduly, or to the weariness of others; a ruling passion.” ‘A
Chubby Little Rich Boy’ shows a young child that has all his material
needs met; he’s well fed and looked after. He ‘Rides Upon his Hobby
Horse’, which could be anything from a real horse to a stick horse.
Presumably he enjoys the fun and the motion—perhaps it soothes
him or keeps him occupied when he has nothing else to do. Perhaps
there are other things he could be doing, such as school lessons or
domestic chores, but he’s probably not thinking about those right
now. Does he enjoy what he’s doing or is it that he’s gotten into the
habit of being on his ‘Hobby Horse’? If he’s just started playing, he
may soon discover that he can’t actually go anywhere with this “toy”
as it’s very limited in its range or motion. Indeed, if it is a “rocking
horse”, it has no forward motion, rather it continually goes over the
same ground, backwards and forwards.
Oracle: Somebody in this situation may feel that they are doing what
is necessary, however it is probably not the real thing, but more of a
training session perhaps a practice run. Are you, or someone else,
doing something over and over? Perhaps there’s a feeling of being
bored with all the big plans and big endeavors that go nowhere
and largely come to nothing. Still, this may be a time of learning.
Looking upon life’s experiences as a lesson will help you to move
ontothenextstageofthesituation.Keepupthepracticeandtheplay,
one day you’ll probably have to prove yourself in a more rigorous,
demanding situation.
Keywords: Hobbies and their pleasures. Unrestrained, imaginative
playthatcanleadtotrulywonderfulcreations,physically,emotionally
andspiritually.Protectedpractice.Havingtohaveone’ssexualneeds
fulfilledbeforeonelosesenergy.Exercise,doingsomethingbecause
one can. Constantly going off on distracting schemes. Boys and their
toys. Unrestrained passion.
TheCaution: Someone spoilt and shallow. Feeling that one can take
on anything without thought of the actual consequences. Playing
when one should be more serious about life. Not doing one’s work,
avoiding it by doing ‘fun’ things instead. Having no friends to play
with.
Sagittarius
25
Do not handicap your children
by making their lives easy.
Lazarus Long
Nothing is so hard for those who
abound in riches to conceive
how others can be in want.
Jonathan Swift
It is amazing how quickly the
kids learn to drive a car,yet
are unable to understand the
lawnmower,snow blower,or
vacuum cleaner.
Ben Bergor
In this era of affluence and of
permissiveness,we have,in all
but cultural areas,bred a nation
of over-privileged youngsters,
saturated with vitamins,
television and plastic toys.
Judith Crist
Well,you know when you’re
rocking in a rocking chair,and
you go so far that you almost
fall over backwards,but at the
last instant you catch yourself?
That’s how I feel all the time.
StephenWright
A hobby a day keeps the
doldrums away.
Phyllis Mcginley

<<<PAGE 289>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
266
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FLAG-BEARER IN A BATTLE
Commentary: ‘A Flag Bearer in a Battle’ is seen. ‘Flag-Bearers’ in
‘Battle’, in the old days, were the ones who were at the front of an
advancing troop of soldiers, ‘Bearing’ the ‘Flag’ of their country
or regiment. They were unarmed, therefore defenseless, and they
were “upfront” and obvious, and as such, were an easy target
for those “on the other side”. Taking the other’s ‘Flag’ was seen
as a victory; hence the ‘Flag-Bearer’ was particularly vulnerable
to attack. However, having the responsibility of being the ‘Flag
Bearer’ was seen as an honored and well respected position.
Oracle: Nowadays, the ‘Flag-Bearer’ can be anybody with an
issue to stand up for, to represent or promote. This issue can
be anything from a worthy cause, such as the homeless or the
disadvantaged, to political issues right through to wanting to
promote or advertise something. All of these may attract some
flack from outside pressure. You may feel that achievements have
been made that should be acknowledged or respected in some
way. It could be that duties and responsibilities have been piling
up on you lately, and the struggle has not been easy. Don’t worry,
though, although the people around you are probably busy, they
are most likely noticing your leadership abilities. You could be
the linchpin of the whole situation It takes guts to get out front,
putting yourself directly in the firing line, but it may be time for
you, or somebody near you, to go for it and stand up for what you
believe. Being willing to be upfront and “out there” in the line of
fire can bring its own kind of rewards. However, it may be that
you are more familiar with being the one “up front”, rather than
being an actual fighter or warrior and one day you may have to
drop your standard (your ‘Flag’) and pick up a tool or a weapon.
Look to any consequences of what it is that you’re taking on and
see how they stack up. Are things likely to work out, or are you
pushing others to have to defend themselves.
Keywords: Having the courage of convictions. Standing up for
ideals. Representing one’s collective in a worthy cause. Carrying
the standard or the ‘Flag’. David and Goliath. Being the messenger.
Advocates. Ensigns. Leadership. Self sacrifice. Fighting for political
ideals. Flag waving.
The Caution: The sacrificial lamb. Overzealous idealism. Empty
shows of courage. The scapegoat. Always being ready to go into
battle. Violence. Fanaticism. Stepping out of line. An inability to
keep quiet. Not knowing when to back off.
Sagittarius
26
It is better to die on your feet
than to live on your knees.
Euripides
Usually when people are sad,
they don’t do anything.They
just cry over their condition.But
when they get angry,they bring
about a change.
Malcolm X
Courage is resistance to fear,
mastery of fear—not absence
of fear.
MarkTwain
Real courage is when you know
you’re licked before you begin,
but you begin anyway and
see it through no matter what.
Harper Lee
Not the glittering weapon fights
the fight,but rather the hero’s
heart.
Proverb
Those who are prepared to
die for any cause are seldom
defeated.
Jawaharlal Nehru
‘Dying for an idea,’again,
sounds well enough,but why
not let the idea die instead of
you?
Wyndham Lewis

<<<PAGE 290>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
267
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE SCULPTOR’S VISION IS SLOWLY
BUT SURELY TAKING FORM
Commentary: ‘The Sculptor’s Vision’ shows an image of some
desired shape or outcome, a picture that is projected out onto
the world through creative work. The fact that the ‘Vision Is
Slowly But Surely Taking Form’ shows that slow and sometimes
painstaking detail is needed to work towards something that is
truly worth the time and effort.
Oracle: You are in a situation where you are able to manipulate
things or events into something of value and lasting integrity.
There is the ability, or the need, to project shape and ‘Form’ onto
materials or situations to have a desired outcome; to have the
‘Vision’ actually be allowed to ‘Take Form’. Who and what we are
in our more private moments right through to our public lives
is largely shown through the life we manifest, the reality we see
before us and create. This Symbol can indicate the changing of
one’s body shape or gaining or losing weight so the appearance
can fit the vision that one has in mind. Whatever ‘The Vision’ is,
it is ‘Surely Taking Form’, and you’ll be able to see clues to how
it’s shaping up in the situation facing you. The work that needs
to be done, or the desired outcome, is finally able to take shape.
However, it is a good idea to observe and decide whether the
‘Form’ that you want is actually what is eventuating or in the
pipeline. Attention and work on the situation at hand will ensure
a final outcome of one’s objectives. Be especially careful to ask
for what you truly want or need. Is the 'Form' that is evolving
truly resonant with who you are? Concentrate on what you want
and don't deviate from the 'Vision' as your work could be spoilt
with one wrong stroke of the brush. Follow the ‘Vision’ and be
creative; picture an outcome and watch it materialize.
Keywords: Concrete creative manifestation. The Godhead. This is
the Symbol of the Galactic Center. Creating the ‘Vision’. Evolution.
Things going from crude beginnings all the way up to concrete
outcomes. Sculptors and sculptures. Molding shapes and forms.
Seeing and visualizing things ahead of their time. Sticking with
the creation.
The Caution: Disregard of others’ needs. Unnatural focus on the
goal. Being one-eyed about the outcome. Watching a situation,
or one’s life “crystallize” into unbending shapes. Having one’s
designs set in stone. Sitting back and thinking that things will
just magically happen without any effort being made. Others
believing they know what you should do or be.
Sagittarius
27
It may be that our role on this
planet is not to worship God
but to create him.
Arthur C.Clarke
Art is not a mirror to reflect
the world,but a hammer with
which to shape it.
Vladimir Mayakovsky
A man paints with his brains
and not with his hands.
Michelangelo
Every separate thought takes
shape and becomes visible in
color and form.
Liu Hua-Yang
The universe is one of God’s
thoughts.
Johann Christoph Friedrich
von Schiller
If you do not find yourself
beautiful yet,act as does the
creator of a statue that is to
be made beautiful:he cuts
away here,he smoothes there,
he makes this line lighter,this
other purer,until a lovely face
has grown upon his work.
Plotinus
We must become the change
we want to see.
Mahatma Gandhi

<<<PAGE 291>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
268
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SPLENDIDLY BUILT BRIDGE,A
HERITAGE OF UNKNOWN AGES,
STILL SPANS THE BEAUTIFUL AND
WILDLY PRIMITIVE STREAM
Commentary: A ‘Splendidly Built Bridge’ is shown. It is a ‘Heritage
of Unknown Ages’. The ‘Bridge’ implies strength, dependability;
passages, links and shortcuts across things that would otherwise
divide and keep people and places apart. This Symbol represents
a ‘Bridge’ that was ‘Built’ long ago, but is still of use and benefit
to all that use it.
Oracle: You may need to find ‘A Bridge’ between your fresh,
energetic aspirations, thoughts and emotions and constructive
thought and activity. Traditional ways of approaching things may
lead to the best solutions now. It may be that the ‘Bridge’ was
developed by the experiences of many generations. It could also
reflect inherent qualities carried through from history, perhaps past
lives. Whatever, you are able to span different levels of awareness
with a ‘Splendidly Built Bridge’. If you feel disconnected, know
that you can be confident, restiing in the reassurance that the
‘Bridge’ is still there. The ‘Bridge’ is an ever-present capacity that
is a gift to you from the universe. However, there may be a “toll”
to be paid for going across the ‘Bridge’. If so, is this journey (this
event, conversation or habit) an outworn one? Is there a continual
reversing of direction or position—or is there movement and links
being forged in one sure direction? If you don’t know how to raise
your level of awareness or intuition into the conscious realm, be
confident that you really do know intuitively. Thoughts or emotions
can act as a link or a barrier between our soul centered inspiration
and the source of higher awareness. The ‘Wildly Primitive Stream’
is a symbol of those emotions, but no matter how far back or
deeply active our emotional landscape is, the ‘Bridge’ can take us
safely across.
Keywords: Enduring elements from past traditions providing links
with the modern day. Reverence for things of worth that stand as
reminders of yesterday. Linking people, places and things with
clarity. Connections with the “old country”, or past lives. Beautiful
and inspiring landscapes. Getting in touch with people. Ever
repeating journeys. Passages across the water. Permanence.
The Caution: Sticking with old, outworn methods, with no new
ideas. Themes of buying the “Brooklyn Bridge”. Continually having
to tread the tried-and-true path without deviating.
Sagittarius
28
There is nothing that makes its
way more directly to the soul
than beauty.
Joseph Addison
Wearetoldnevertocrossabridge
tillwecometoit,butthisworldis
ownedbymenwhohave“crossed
bridges”intheirimaginationfar
aheadofthecrowd.
Speakers Library
The bridges you cross before
you come to them are over
rivers that aren’t there.
Gene Brown
Pass the bridge that your
kinsmen have passed.
Azerbaijani Proverb
My mother,religious Negro,
proud of having waded
through a storm,is,very
obviously a sturdy bridge that I
have crossed over on.
Toni Cade Bambara
If you destroy a bridge,be sure
you can swim.
Swahili Proverb
We cross our bridges when we
come to them and burn them
behind us,with nothing to
show for our progress except a
memory of the smell of smoke,
and a presumption that once
our eyes watered.
Tom Stoppard

<<<PAGE 292>>>
SAGITTARIUS
{
269
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FAT BOY MOWING THE LAWN
Commentary: ‘A Fat Boy Mowing the Lawn’ shows someone
getting up and doing the necessary chores and to improve the
appearance around the home. The ‘Fat Boy’ can be the “kid” who
has everything available to him, but still, for the moment at least,
has to do what his family and society says rather than what he
may prefer to be doing. As he is said to be a ‘Fat Boy’, perhaps he’s
not used to having to do or contribute very much, mostly laying
around watching television or playing computer games. The ‘Fat
Boy’, here has to learn how to use machinery, to deal with things
such as oil, petrol and spark plugs. It may be that he’s not had to
dirty his hands very often with jobs or menial chores.
Oracle: In order to remain socially acceptable amongst the people
and in the neighborhood where we live, we regularly have to trim
and clean up our environment. For whatever reason, it has to be
accepted that everyday chores are important and necessary. Taken
to extremes, however, this can lead to having to keep up with the
Jones’. How well does the “appearance” of this situation look? Is
there a need for maintenance and care to put on a better show and
impress everybody for society’s sake? You may be paying more
attention to appearances than you are to those things that others
don’t see. The “front yard” may be all cleaned up and looking neat
and tidy, but how does the “back yard” look? Many people are
fooled by how things appear, but there is usually an unsettling
feeling that everything is not quite right. Perhaps someone has
to pay some price by proving themselves? There can be a feeling
of having to do chores that don’t truly reflect what one is capable
of or desires to do. Is there something that you’ve been going to
do for years, but haven’t gotten around to? Jobs, chores, tasks and
duties need to be done by someone. Have people been asking and
asking for these things to be done? There may be an upside; with
all the exercise there may be a possibility of losing a little weight
and getting fit.
Keywords: Superficial show. Things looking respectable, and
“right”. Trying to lose weight through physical activity. Coming
to grips with mechanical tools. Perspiring through effort. Training
the youngsters to do the chores. Maintenance. Spare parts. Spark
plugs. Doing odd jobs. Signs of affluence. Laborers. Hired hands.
The Caution: Pushing social respectability, avoiding something.
Not wanting to help around the house. The “lounge-lizard”. Not
dealing with the reality of life. Having too many jobs. Not getting
off one’s backside. Ignoring the nagging. Barging into other’s space.
Making a lot of noise. Incompetent helpers.
Sagittarius
29
A perfect summer day is when
the sun is shining,the breeze is
blowing,the birds are singing,
and the lawn mower is broken.
James Dent
The lazy man who goes to
borrow a spade says,“I hope I
will not find one.”
Malagasy Proverb
The grass is always greener over
the septic tank.
Erma Bombeck
It is amazing how quickly the
kids learn to drive a car,yet
are unable to understand the
lawnmower,snow blower,or
vacuum cleaner.
Ben Bergor
There are two kinds of men who
never amount to much—those
who cannot do what they are
told and those who can do
nothing else.
Cyrus H.K Curtis
The fellow that owns his own
home is always coming out of a
hardware store.
Kin Hubbard
Laziness travels so slowly that
poverty soon overtakes him.
Benjamin Franklin

<<<PAGE 293>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
{
270
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE POPE BLESSING THE FAITHFUL
Commentary:‘ThePope’isanimageofsomeonewhohasanexalted
position and operates with a high sense of authority, hopefully with
spiritual awareness and love. The word ‘Pope’ comes from the Latin
“papa”” and the Greek “pappas”. He is dispensing ‘Blessings’ on
his people; those who believe in him, his position and his cause.
‘Blessings’ can also come from worshipping a higher power with
people of like mind. Dispensing the rewards of faith upon people
who are committed and eager leads to an enlightening of those
who receive, and also those who do the ‘Blessing’. A major voice
will be heard—who is the spokesperson that will be heard by the
collective?
Oracle: There is often a need to create or assign someone as the
physical representation of what is believed on the spiritual plane.
This person of authority performs actions that give our beliefs a
feeling of reality and draw the community together. When you do
things that are true to your inner self there is a feeling of connection
to a higher power. This feeling is like a ‘Blessing’ and is a reminder of
the spiritual purpose of life. The situation or event that is the center
of your question may be in need of just such a ‘Blessing’. If you are
one of the “worthy ones”, you will probably receive a sign that you
are on the true path. If the question relates to a group situation, it
may be that you or someone in the group needs to take on the role
of spiritual representative, be a ‘Pope’, and reward the group with
your words of wisdom and experience. That will help maintain
their focus, motivation and faith in what they are trying to achieve.
It may be important to show reverence and respect to others, as this
will lead to rewards of their own. This can also represent someone
having a powerful memory. A noble or regal person will remember
thefacesandnamesofhugenumbersofpeoplewhosurroundthem.
It can feel like a 'Blessing' to be in their company.
Keywords: Rituals of reverence, blessings and worship. Sincere
interest in others. Being on the inside looking out or being on
the outside looking in. Recognizing the source of enormous inner
riches. Rewards for loyalty. Seeking support or recognition. Eye-to-
eye contact. Being remembered. Charisma and presence. Having an
audience with someone.
The Caution: Overwhelming political or spiritual rituals. Lust for
power.Negating,projectingandtransferringone’sshadowontoothers.
Nottakingresponsibilityforone’sactions.Beggingpeopletodispense
favors. Sucking up to be accepted or recognized. Manipulating for
desired ends. Nervous reaction to power or position. Demanding
obedience. Lording it over people. Leaving people out that don’t
measure up or conform. Having people at one’s beck and call.
Sagittarius
30
A single conversation with a
wise man is better than ten years
of study.
Chinese Proverb
What I’m looking for is a blessing
that’s not in disguise.
Kitty O’Neill Collins
It is one of the blessings of old
friends that you can afford to be
stupid with them.
RalphWaldo Emerson
You must pay the price if you
wish to secure the blessing.
Andrew Jackson
I would have made a good pope.
Richard Nixon
Toerrishuman,toforgive,divine.
Alexander Pope
See everything,overlook a great
deal,correct a little.
Pope John XXIII
A faithful friend is a strong
defense;And he that hath found
him hath found a treasure.
Louisa May Alcott
A true friend is the greatest of
all blessings,and that which
we take the least care of all to
acquire.
Francois de La Rochefoucauld

<<<PAGE 294>>>
CAPRICORN
}
271
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN INDIAN CHIEF CLAIMS
RECOGNITION AND POWER FROM
THE ASSEMBLED TRIBE
Commentary:‘AnIndianChiefClaimsRecognitionandPowerFrom
the Assembled Tribe’ shows someone in a position of authority,
standing strong, staking their ‘Claim’ and place amongst the people
that he or she leads or represents. This is a Symbol associated with
the Jesus story. Jesus’ karmic lesson was to rise above the crowd;
to claim power in situations, places and with people; and to accept
any consequences that such a ‘Claim’ could lead to.
Oracle: There are leadership issues here. Sometimes we need to
rise to the occasion and take charge, and this is most likely one
of those times. This can lead to a struggle for control. You may be
challenged to remind those around you of your leadership qualities
and your ability to be strong, reliable and accountable. There’s the
need to stand up in front of others and be counted as someone who
has what it takes. As long as nobody is “lording it over” others, life
can operate in a smoother manner, with everyone understanding
their place in the scheme of things. We all have to find the courage
to stand up and exhibit a show of strength now and then. However,
there can be the flip side: are those above you reminding you
of the lesser position you occupy in the scheme of things? You
can find your own internal authority by believing in yourself, by
‘Claiming Recognition and Power’ and acknowledging your nobility
and courage. There can be challenging events happening in the
external world, a battle of wills perhaps, but if you stand strong and
firm in your inner belief in yourself, you can come out victorious
with a greater sense of authority radiating out to those around
you. People will take you more seriously. Always know when to
listen to and give way to the rights of others and you’ll be given a
stronger position in society.
Keywords: Assuming authority and the need for it. Benevolence
bestowed. Winning by charisma and strength of numbers. Finding
a true sense of place. Signs that one should be in charge. Staking
one’s claim. The ‘Claim of Recognition’. Respect. Having to stand
up or stand out in the crowd. Having the charisma of leadership.
Consolidating power. Popularity contests.
The Caution: Power tripping and struggles. Over-inflated views
of one’s self. The continual need to quieten power battles. Being
challenged by those left and right. Demanding attention and that
others follow orders. Taking over. Selfish and ego-driven. Too
many chiefs.
Capricorn 1
Self-reverence,self-knowledge,
self-control.These three alone
lead life to sovereign power.
AlfredTennyson
To lead the people walk behind
them.
Lao-Tzu
A lot of young girls have looked
to their career paths and have
said they’d like to be chief.
There’s been a change in the
limits people see.
Wilma Pearl Mankiller
There are two things people
want more than sex and
money—recognition and
praise.
Mary Kay Ash
If your sctions inspire others
to dream more,learn more,do
more and become more,you
are a leader.
John Quincy Adams
He is not fit to command others
that cannot command himself.
Proverb
There are too many chiefs and
not enough indians.
Proverb
There are no small parts,only
small actors.
Proverb
Power corrupts;absolute power
corrupts absolutely.
Proverb

<<<PAGE 295>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
272
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THREE STAINED-GLASS WINDOWS
IN A GOTHIC CHURCH,ONE
DAMAGED BY WAR
Commentary: ‘Three Stained-Glass Windows in a Gothic Church,
One Damaged by War’ pictures the need to stay strong on every
level under the barrage of some type of bombardment. A ‘Church’
is normally a place of safety and refuge, but ‘War’ has broken
through its divine barrier and caused ‘Damage’, or some injury,
that is much bigger than just a broken ‘Window’. One of the three
corners of unity, in this case the one of love, is ‘Damaged’ and
compromised by the aggressive warring nature of mankind.
Oracle: With the shattering of the ‘Window’, there is often a loss
of faith, hope and trust. Someone may have previously felt safe
in the confines of their life and suddenly a “bomb hits”, breaking
and demolishing some aspect of their usually safe and secure life.
This situation may take considerable time to heal, although if the
structure is sound, fixing the ‘Window’ (the place where the light
gets in) can be done relatively quickly. Still, even with the best of
thoughts, emotions and intentions, it might take months or years
to truly heal the devastating effect that’s been unleashed. In fact,
the actual ‘Damage’ that this Symbol implies may have started
long ago. There is a need to get it repaired and things often need
healing on the emotional and physical levels. Hypnotherapy,
psychoanalysis and past life regression may reveal pain, injury
and trauma that are holding one back from being able to accept or
give love. Acceptance of love can lead to healing on many levels.
Love is often the main issue that needs to be projected outwards
as well as accepted inwards.
Keywords: Seeking sanctuary. Careless aggression where love
should be. Religious or philosophical differences that spark off
problems. Fears of being “under attack” whilst in the spotlight.
Sorrow and despair over losses. Loss of faith. ‘Windows’ that are
cracked, broken or smashed. Cracks and shattering. Rescue of
endangered holy places. Loss of love through harsh circumstance.
The need for repair.
The Caution: Feeling disconnected from the reality of what’s
going on. Fearfulness OR fearlessness, when one should be
careful. Signs of rubble all around. Aggression between people.
Burning down churches. A lack of safe places. Being shell-shocked
and ravaged. Cold breezes entering sacred spaces. Psychological
and emotional scars. Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.
Capricorn 2
As a vessel is known by the
sound,whether it be cracked or
not,so men are proved by their
speeches whether they be wise
or foolish.
Demosthenes
People are like stained-glass
windows.They sparkle and
shine when the sun is out,but
when the darkness sets in,their
true beauty is revealed only
if there is a light from within.
Elizabeth Kübler-Ross
There is nothing fiercer than
a failed artist.The energy
remains,but,having no outlet,
it implodes in a great black fart
of rage which smokes up all the
inner windows of the soul.
Erica Jong
Beautiful light is born of
darkness,so the faith that
springs from conflict is often the
strongest and the best.
R.Turnbull
Eventsunfoldsounpredictably,
sounfairly,humanhappiness
doesnotseemtohavebeen
includedinthedesignofcreation.
Itisonlywe,withourcapacity
tolove,thatgivemeaningtothe
indifferentuniverse.
Woody Allen
There is a crack,a crack in
everything.That’s how the light
gets in.
Leonard Cohen

<<<PAGE 296>>>
CAPRICORN
}
273
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE HUMAN SOUL,IN ITS
EAGERNESS FOR NEW EXPERIENCES,
SEEKS EMBODIMENT
Commentary: ‘The Human Soul, In Its Eagerness For New
Experiences, Seeks Embodiment’ is a Symbol of the soul’s
longing for self-expression. In our western calendar, this Symbol
is highlighted on December 25 each year, on Christ’s birthday. It
reflects the Jesus story in many ways.
Oracle: This Symbol shows that a new level of consciousness
is about to reveal and express itself. Many parts of yourself are
seeking expression and ‘Embodiment’ and there may be a sense of
‘Eagerness’ or urgency in the process. Something ‘New’ is being
born, particularly something that’s coming from deep inside of
you, and it can feel like nothing is going to stop it from achieving
this ‘Embodiment’. You may feel very open to the messages of
the world around you, as clues come through to show you how
to go about ‘Embodying’ these ‘New Experiences’. There can
be unbounded enthusiasm, but it may take some time before
what you want can be brought into reality. At first, this is likely
to be a quiet time of inner contemplation and outer observance.
Regardless of your more immediate physical circumstances, there
is an evolution of understanding going on. This Symbol can point
to children wanting to come through into this life along with
an unfurling of one’s creativity and projects into physical form.
Whatever it represents, a new beginning of life or hope is wanting
to come into conscious manifestation now. This Symbol often
brings up issues to do with writing and self-expression. It may
be a good idea to keep a diary or to write things down as ideas
will often just pour out. This situation may haave a fated quality,
with some extraordinary outcome just waiting to happen.
Keywords: Inner motivation leading to expansion. Jesus and
his disciples. Being “born” quickly. Manifesting one’s desires
without concern for consequences. Being “born again”. Feeling
like a changed person. The need to drop into the body. Religious
and spiritual rebirth. Reincarnation. The urge to create. Writers
and writing.
The Caution: Denying the growth that’s beckoning in favor
of social responsibility. Not leaving when perhaps one should.
Having to seek permission to come through any “new gateway”.
A loss of faith. Being obsessed about an ideal or idea. Feeling cast
adrift from one's reality.
Capricorn 3
We do not believe in ourselves
until someone reveals that deep
inside us is something valuable,
worth listening to,worthy of
our trust,sacred to our touch.
Once we believe in ourselves
we can risk curiosity,wonder,
spontaneous delight or any
experience that reveals the
human spirit.
e.e.cummings
I count life just as stuff to try the
soul’s strength on.
Robert Browning
God does not ask about our
ability,but our availability.
Anon
The act of writing is the act of
making soul,alchemy.
Gloria Evangelina Anzaldua
The greatest human quest is
to know what one must do
in order to become a human
being.
Immanuel Kant
Variety is the soul of pleasure.
Aphra Behn
To know what you prefer
instead of humbly saying amen
to what the world tells you you
ought to prefer is to keep your
soul alive.
Robert Louis Stevenson

<<<PAGE 297>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
274
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GROUP OF PEOPLE ENTERING A
CANOE FOR A JOURNEY BY WATER
Commentary: A ‘Group of People Entering a Canoe’ is a Symbol
of people coming together to set off on a ‘Journey’. They may
already know each other or they may come from many different
places, or from overseas. Regardless of where they’ve come from,
they are all ‘Entering' this 'Canoe’ for a ‘Journey By Water’.
Oracle: To embark on ‘a Journey By Water’ with a ‘Group of
People’ is to embark on a ‘Journey’ of emotional discovery. People
may have differing views of what’s going on and everyone has to
fully agree with where they’re going. In a ‘Canoe’, some people put
in the effort of “paddling” whilst others are passengers, enjoying
the ride in their various ways. If every person participates to the
success of this endeavor, the ‘Journey’ can be swift and strong.
If all the effort is left to just a few, there can be an imbalance
of energy that could lead to resentment and even the failure of
the mission. Hence, there can be issues over “who does what”.
Depending on the sharing of the responsibilities, some members
may be fatigued by the process whereas others will remain
fresh. This may not be fair, as some will have an advantage
over others, which can lead to emotional problems, especially
jealousy, impatience, bickering or dissatisfaction. However, with
cooperation, there can be great success. If this is a personal
‘Journey’, then it is important that you remain balanced and don’t
overexert yourself on the emotional or physical level. This may
also be a time when divergent aspects of your personality come
together to explore an emotional situation. Getting everybody “in
the same boat” can be a challenge here, whether it’s real people,
or the various parts of your own thought processes. Cooperation,
compromise and common goals will win the day.
Keywords: Cohesive effort, cooperation and coordination. People
coming together with a shared goal in sight. Being continually on
the move. Feeling like one’s on a ‘Journey’ of destiny. People all
pulling together. Canoes. Boats. Vehicles of discovery. Setting off
on an adventure. Entering the unknown. Workshops. Unknown
destinations. Setting sail. Observing the weather. Yacht races.
The Caution: Uncoordinated energies. Not going along with
anybody. Rocking the boat. The urge to get off midstream. Being
bored with close company. A lack of privacy or quiet time. Back
seat drivers. No one navigating. Lack of a realistic itinerary.
Capricorn 4
No member of a crew is praised
for the rugged individuality of
his rowing.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Only the guy who isn’t rowing
has time to rock the boat.
Jean-Paul Sartre
...as one goes through life one
learns that if you don’t paddle
your own canoe,you don’t
move.
Katharine Hepburn
A canoe does not know who
is king.When it turns over,
everyone gets wet.
Malagasy Proverb
Plenty of folks are so contrary
that if they should fall into the
river,they would insist upon
floating upstream.
Josh Billings
Everyone must row with the
oars he has.
Proverb
We may have all come on
different ships,but we’re in the
same boat now.
Martin Luther King,Jr.
If there is no wind,row.
Latin Proverb
We are not human beings
on a spiritual journey.We are
spiritual beings on a human
journey.
Stephen Covey

<<<PAGE 298>>>
CAPRICORN
}
275
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
INDIANS—SOME ROWING A CANOE
WHILE OTHERS ARE DANCING A
WAR DANCE
Commentary: ‘Indians—Some Rowing a Canoe’ is an image of
people pulling and working together in a communal effort to do
something or to get somewhere. The fact that some are ‘Dancing
a War Dance’ may be the reason some are ‘Rowing a Canoe’ in
the first place. Perhaps they need to make a show of strength
and define their boundaries. My friend Dale O’Brien says of this
Symbol: “the purpose of the ‘War Dance’ is not merely to evoke
frenzied anger, but to see a vision of the battle yet to come, a
mystical warrior’s preparation. It is as if the consciousness of the
“in trance” dancing warrior is also at once in the warrior’s activity
(e.g. rowing a canoe).” Maybe they have to “row” through enemy
territory and are confronted by the prospect of an attack.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, some people will just want
to get on with the job and get somewhere fruitful whilst others
are seeking to act with aggression. It may be necessary to solve
things with a firm determination and vigilant approach to others.
Aggression isn’t ever really the answer. However, to make a show
of one’s intentions and position, and the effort that one will go to
defend it, may ultimately win the respect of those around. Who’s
doing the ‘War Dance’ in this situation? Is it you or another?
Perhaps you take turns with each other, with everyone ending
up either ‘Rowing’ or ‘Dancing a War Dance’. There may be an
element of the enjoyment of drama and getting people whipped
up. This can be exciting for a while, but can quickly become
tiring or boring. As they say: “keep rowing, but row away from
the rocks.”
Keywords: Some getting on with their lives whilst others are not.
Vehicles of discovery versus arguing and bickering. Threats and
intimidation. Making a show of power and mobility. Cooperation
bringing release from difficulties. Mobilizing forces. Psyching
oneself up. Group efforts. Traffic.
TheCaution: Making one’s case whilst having to be continually on
the move. Being emotionally charged. Arguments and bickering
that halt forward movement or growth. Intimidation. Moving
targets. Superficial shows of strength for display purposes. Making
a lot of noise. Pulling faces. Gestures that threaten. Accepting no
opposition to progress. Aggression. Divergent motivations leading
to confusion. Road rage.
Capricorn 5
He who rocks the boat seldom
has time to row it.
Bryan Munro
There will never be an army of
perfectly nonviolent people.It
will be formed of those who will
honestly endeavor to observe
nonviolence.
Mohandas Gandhi
Don’t insult the alligator until
you’ve crossed the river.
Haitian Proverb
No man can paddle two canoes
at the same time.
Bantu Proverb
Like watermen that row one
way and look another.
Robert Burton
One of the songs I’m gonna
sing is“We all in the same boat
brother.You rock it too far to
the right you fall in the waddah,
rock it too far to the left you
fall in the same waddah,and
it’s just as wet on both sides.”
Huddie“Leadbelly”Ledbetter
In battling evil,excess is
good;for he who is moderate
in announcing the truth is
presenting half-truth.He
conceals the other half out of
fear of the people’s wrath.
Kahlil Gibran
Paddle your own canoe.
Proverb

<<<PAGE 299>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
276
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TEN LOGS LIE UNDER AN ARCHWAY
LEADING TO DARKER WOODS
Commentary: ‘Ten Logs Lie Under an Archway Leading to Darker
Woods’ is an image of remnants of the past having fallen. The ‘Ten
Logs’ were previously trees, now they ‘Lie Under an Archway’,
blocking the entrance to somewhere deeper in the ‘Woods’. The
‘Ten Logs’ may be smack in the way of the entrance to these
‘Darker Woods’, blocking the possibility of the journey forward,
or they may provide a bridge to venture deeper.
Oracle: Throughout life we develop skills and resources that
enhance our ability to cope with the present and help us in the
future. These things, represented by the ‘Ten Logs’, often need
to be stored somewhere. We usually store things out of the way
and in a place that is least used. When it is time to move on, you
come across all the things that have accumulated over time, and
have waiting for use. Perhaps these things are not relevant to your
path now. The thing is you may have to let them go. This can
cause some grief, as you may not wish to let them go. However,
the skills, talents and memories that developed whilst creating
these resources remains with you on your journey. You may feel
there is a difficult and mysterious period ahead of you and that
you need to prepare. This marks a time to make any preparations
and create the necessary safeguards before continuing on your
journey into the unknown. You are on an important journey,
perhaps one of destiny, but you won’t know for a while what,
or where, this journey is really leading to. Let go of obstructions
from the past, before you venture into the future. See this as
an opportunity for further growth. Look to see what’s standing
in your way. What could block your path now that you’re at
the ‘Archway Leading to Darker Woods’? The trip may be very
rewarding, only time will tell.
Keywords: Journeys into the unknown. Getting past the past.
Tenacity, stamina and energy preservation. Things to consider
before moving deeper. Thresholds, ‘Archways’, entrances. Dark
forests. The unknown and the “unknowable”. Delving into the
subconscious. Memories that lead into deep or strange places.
Gateways. Fallen trees.
The Caution: Fear of the untrodden path. Being afraid to make a
move. Things blocked or obstructed. Getting lost in something
and not knowing how to get out. Looking for directions that are
obscure or concealed.
Capricorn 6
The oldest and strongest
emotion of mankind is fear,and
the oldest and strongest kind of
fear is fear of the unknown.
H.P.Lovecraft
Today is a fresh start.I will
surpass all past performances!
I cast aside those emotional
blocks which I may have placed
in my own path.
R.A.Schwartz
The block of granite which is an
obstacle in the pathway of the
weak,becomes a steppingstone
in the pathway of the strong.
Thomas Carlyle
The road of life can only reveal
itself as it is traveled;each turn
in the road reveals a surprise.
Man’s future is hidden.
Anon
Man can learn nothing except
by going from the known to the
unknown.
Claude Bernard
Two roads diverged in a wood,
and I – I took the one less
traveled by,And that has made
all the difference.
Robert Frost
As long as a man stands in his
own way,everything seems to
be in his way.
RalphWaldo Emerson

<<<PAGE 300>>>
CAPRICORN
}
277
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A VEILED PROPHET SPEAKS SEIZED
BY THE POWER OF A GOD
Commentary: ‘A Veiled Prophet Speaks Seized By The Power of
a God’. The ‘Veiled Prophet Speaks’ can picture anyone, or any
thing, that can bring information or knowledge through to others
who are willing to listen. The ‘Veiled Prophet’ may be someone
who holds the key to questions that need to be answered. They
can be a mouthpiece for the agenda of others.
Oracle: Information is coming through someone, or something,
and it may be difficult to know whether to fully trust it. With
our modern age of communications, we can receive incredible
amounts of information. This can include all sorts of theories and
wonders. Some will be useful while some stretch the truth. With
such power contained in words, we have to be careful about what
we say as well as what we hear. As this is a ‘Veiled Prophet’ there
can be complications associated with the “message” that’s being
spoken. As the ‘Prophet’ is ‘Seized By The Power of a God’, it can
be very powerful and useful knowledge that is being bestowed.
Sometimes these messages have fabulous revelations and kernels
of truth that can lead you on a quest for more insight into how
the world operates. There’s often words and insights that we
can live our lives by, although not everyone will be swayed or
influenced by this ‘Prophet’, however he or she can have an
immense ‘Power’ of attraction and persuasion. Remember to
be careful to sift through the real meaning of what’s being said.
Look carefully for the signs—is it truth that you are being fed?
This powerful energy can be used for the good of all involved, or
it can just lead people astray. The old saying goes that words are
like a “sword”, they can cut deeply and leave a vast impression,
for good and for bad.
Keywords: Hypnotherapy or hypnotic suggestion. Manipulation
of lesser beings. Having insights that transport to other levels.
Channelling and medium ship. Translations. Prophets and bringers
of messages. Empowerment. Messages erupting. Speaking.
Announcing. Bearing important news. Power. Charisma. Veils.
Background voices.
The Caution: Conscious manipulation and propaganda. Not
owning up to all the elements of one’s personality. Denying
expression. Blurting out things that hurt or alienate. Barging into
other’s conversations. Leading people astray with exaggeration
or lies. False impressions.
Capricorn 7
Talking and eloquence are not
the same:to speak and to speak
well are two things.A fool may
talk,but a wise man speaks.
Heinrich Heine
But words are things,and a
small drop of ink falling like
dew upon a thought,produces
that which makes thousands,
perhaps millions,think.
Lord Byron
The most essential gift for
a good writer is a built-in,
shockproof,shit detector.This is
the writer’s radar and all great
writers have had it.
Ernest Hemingway
In medieval times,people
thought that evil spirits could
enter a person through an open
mouth.These days they more
often leave that way.
David Deckert
The devil can site scripture for his
purpose.
William Shakespeare
When God wants to speak
and deal with us,he does not
avail himself of an angel but of
parents,or the pastor,or of our
neighbor.
Martin Luther
The great masses of the people
… will more easily fall victims to
a great lie than to a small one.
Adolf Hitler

<<<PAGE 301>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
278
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
BIRDS IN THE HOUSE SINGING
HAPPILY
Commentary: ‘Birds In The House’ are ‘Singing Happily’. This
is a beautiful image of lightness and happiness. To hear ‘Birds
Singing Happily’ is like a blessing, and if their sounds are ringing
through your ‘House’, it can feel like a double blessing. The ‘Birds
Singing Happily’ can be echoed in the sounds of our loved one’s
voices, as they go about their daily lives with a sunny and cheerful
attitude. It may be music that’s played in the home.
Oracle: You may feel a sense of uncomplicated contentment. Even
though there are a number of social rules to obey, they probably
don’t bother you or those around you. This is a time for sharing
good feelings and ‘Happiness’ with all who enter your sphere of
operations. Feelings of safety and protection are spontaneously
shared by the act of ‘Singing’, which can be actual ‘Singing’,
but can also be laughter or animated conversation. To enjoy the
moment can often depend on you having faith that the good
things of life will not fade, but will continue. In your situation
it is important to hold to this faith and enjoy your life. It is wise
to remember to be “in the moment”. This Symbol is also about
the contagious nature of displays of happiness and celebrations
of joy and contentment. By expressing your pleasure you can
lift the feelings of others and they will most likely join in the
chorus, in some way. The question is: Are people as ‘Happy’ and
secure in this situation as they look? A fairly quick glance around
will bring the message you probably need. Perhaps someone is
walking around singing, bringing joy. Alternatively, they may be
continually “singing the blues”. Remember to have music playing
often in your ‘House’ as it can dispel stress and help everyone
unwind.
Keywords: Being at one with everything. Tunes sung or whistled.
The promise of contentment. Communal sharing and fun. Faith
in the good things of life. Music. Instruments. Playing the piano.
Singing. The radio. Chattering in the background. Entertaining
others. Seeing the beauty in life. Reminding others of how life can
be rewarding. The sound of voices. Birds. Positive thinking.
The Caution: Idle chatter. Smug superiority and the feeling that
one has it all. Not seeing the happiness inherent in one’s everyday
life. Whining and complaining. Making noise for the sake of it.
Looking only at the difficulties one faces. Feeling caged in.
Unable to fly when and where one wants to. Loneliness. Feeling
abandoned by the good things.
Capricorn 8
If I keep a green bough in my
heart,the singing bird will come.
Chinese Proverb
A forest bird never wants a cage.
Henrik Ibsen
We think caged birds sing,when
indeed they cry.
JohnWebster
A bird does not sing because it
has an answer.It sings because it
has a song.
Chinese Proverb
A guest sees more in an hour
than the host in a year.
Polish Proverb
How easy to be amiable in the
midst of happiness and success.
Anne Sophie Swetchine
“Hope”is the thing with feathers
That perches in the soul And
sings the tunes without the
words And never stops at all.
Emily Dickinson
A good laugh is sunshine in a
house.
William MakepeaceThackeray
Suffering is the price of being
alive,and it is music and
singing and art that has helped
me live through some of the
most difficult things that have
happened to me.
Judy Collins

<<<PAGE 302>>>
CAPRICORN
}
279
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ANGEL COMES CARRYING A
HARP
Commentary: ‘An Angel Comes Carrying a Harp’. The ‘Angel' is
an image of beauty, serenity, salvation and peace. As the ‘Angel
Comes Carrying a Harp’ there is the feeling of music, harmony
and enchantment. People who play music can transport our
minds, emotions and bodies through their beautiful melodies
and remind us of simple pleasures. The music that this ‘Angel’
plays is probably very soothing and reassuring. ‘Harps' are more
common around us than most people probably realize. Pianos
have ‘Harps’ inside them, and harmonicas (mouth organs) are
often called a ‘Harp’. Things such as wind chimes can radiate
these harmonies as well.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, somebody is able to “tune in”
and radiate harmony around him or her. This pictures a situation
of caring for others, of generosity of spirit and a fulfilled selfhood.
The ‘Angel’ may come to inspire people to do their best. This
Symbol implies that someone will come bringing themes of the
hope and trust in all that’s good in life. They can, indeed, offer
joy and salvation, especially when it’s most needed. Having said
that, the ‘Angel Carrying a Harp’ can also soothe your mind to
the point where you can be persuaded to accept or do things
that may not always be in your best interests. So, do be aware
of the shadowy side of this Symbol: somebody trying to trick
you, or someone else, into thinking a certain way, or believing
something. Positively seen, this Symbol assures that there is an
indication of the possibility of absolute serenity (and the need
for it). It is a Symbol of being relaxed and reassured.
Keywords: Demons driven away by music. Lifting faith and
hope. Messages of peace from the other side. Having a message
to spin. Being in tune, spiritually. Having an elevated view of
humanity. Creating harmony. Blowing the whistle. Advertising.
Salvation that arrives when most needed. Harmonics. Music and
musical instruments. Visitations of spirit. Messages of love and
hope arriving. Pulling on the heartstrings. Heavenly attunement.
Beautiful tunes. Promises of redemption. Revelations. Plucking
strings.
The Caution: Having a holier-than-thou attitude. Losing oneself
in fantasy. Promising more than can be delivered. “Melodies” that
deceive or lead astray. ‘Harping’ on things (dwelling on issues).
Messages that deceive or lead astray. Playing a tune and expecting
all to follow.
Capricorn 9
Fools rush in where angels fear
to tread.
Alexander Pope
Angels rush in when fools are
almost dead.
Rudolph Fisher
Music is the harmonious voice
of creation;an echo of the
invisible world.
Giuseppe Mazzini
Chords that were broken will
vibrate once more.
Fanny Crosby
When the angels present
themselves,the devils abscond.
Egyptian Proverb
Music is well said to be the
speech of angels.
Thomas Carlyle
Orpheus with his lute made
trees,And the mountain tops
that freeze,Bow themselves
when he did sing.
William Shakespeare
For thou art my harp,and
pipe,and temple—a harp for
harmony—a pipe by reason of
the Spirit a temple by reason of
the word;so that the first may
sound,the second breathe,the
third contain the Lord.
The Bible
Harp not on that string,
madam,that is past.
William Shakespeare

<<<PAGE 303>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
280
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ALBATROSS FEEDING FROM THE
HAND OF A SAILOR
Commentary: ‘An Albatross Feeding From the Hand of a Sailor’ is
an image that implies the necessity of being able to overcome the
perceived separation between humans and other living beings.
Feelings of separation are usually the case when we don’t really
understand or trust each other in some way. The ‘Albatross’ has
to overcome the fear it experiences from being in such close
contact with a human and the ‘Sailor’ has to fight his superstitions
that surround the ‘Albatross’. In “The Ancient Mariner”, a sailor is
condemned to eternally sail the world, after killing an albatross
that had helped rescue his ship.
Oracle: This is a time for overcoming fears through gentleness.
Even seemingly natural “enemies” can realize the possibility
of interaction and the joys it can bring. You may have to deal
with someone, or something, from whom you have usually
kept a distance. Trusting in the goodness of people and other
living beings – rather than projecting negative thoughts and
connotations onto them – can lead to experiences that few have.
There can be a reward, tangible or otherwise, in calling all kinds
of animals and people to you in the endeavor to have some kind of
exchange or communication. You may end up helping each other
in some way. Call out to those who appear to be different, far
away or alien to you, as there’s a good chance they will respond.
Fears that inhibit communication and communion with others
can be dispelled with simple and often spontaneous acts of
kindness and gentleness. Large leaps of faith can develop out of
the smallest efforts of overcoming fear, distance and superstition.
Being receptive, out reaching and caring can shorten or even
completely dispel the separation between you. Extending a hand
to others without concern for the consequences can lead to fear
and alienation being overcome. It often just takes the simple act
of reaching out.
Keywords: Feeding one’s higher nature with good nourishment.
Banishing worries, so that one can fly ever higher. Overcoming
superstitions or beliefs. Travelers who put themselves at risk in
foreign lands or cultures. Talking to anybody anywhere. Sharing
one’s bounty. Sailors, boats. Birds. Empathy and sympathy for
others. Restoring trust and hope.
The Caution: Manipulating events or people with false
nourishment. Having alternative motives for wanting to draw
others close. Being afraid of strangers or strange situations. The
loss of independence. Fear of intimacy.
Capricorn 10
Courage is not the absence of
fear,but rather the judgment
that something else is more
important than fear.
Ambrose Redmoon
Dangers bring fears,and fears
more dangers bring.
Richard Baxter
Who sees all beings in his own
Self,and his own Self in all
beings,loses all fear.
Upanishad
Imustnotfear.Fearisthemind-
killer.Fearisthelittledeaththat
bringstotalobliteration.Iwill
facemyfear.Iwillpermititto
passovermeandthroughme.
AndwhenithasgonepastIwill
turntheinnereyetoseeitspath.
Wherethefearhasgonethere
willbenothing.OnlyIwillremain.
Frank Herbert
The only thing we have to fear
is fear itself.
Franklin D.Roosevelt
I once had a sparrow alight
upon my shoulder for a
moment while I was hoeing in
a village garden,and I felt that
I was more distinguished by
that circumstance than I should
have been by any epaulet I
could have worn.
HenryThoreau
Do not speak of a rhinoceros if
there is no tree nearby.
African Proverb

<<<PAGE 304>>>
CAPRICORN
}
281
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
PHEASANTS DISPLAY THEIR
BRILLIANT COLORS ON A PRIVATE
ESTATE
Commentary: ‘Pheasants Display Their Brilliant Colors on a
Private Estate’ is an image of beauty, color and wealth. It pictures
a situation of the enjoyment of life’s luxuries. The ‘Pheasants’ are
beautiful as they ‘Display Their Brilliant Colors’. They have long
tails and brilliantly colored plumage. People are drawn to their
beauty and can be awed by their presence. That they are on ‘A
Private Estate’ shows an environment of privilege and security.
Oracle: This can picture going after one’s life goals. Riches,
refinement and abundance are everywhere. However, just
take care: ‘Pheasants’ can be game birds, so there may be an
element of underlying danger. Displays of wealth and beauty can
inspire others, but they can also lead to jealousy and begrudging
acknowledgments. That this place is pictured as a ‘Private Estate’
signifies that it may need to be protected, and kept ‘Private’.
People who don’t belong there may be able to come and visit,
but it may be that they’re really invading someone else’s space
or privacy. The visitors need to show respect and courtesy and
not presume that they can move in and take over. On the other
hand, being ‘Private’, this place may not be truly welcoming to
people; they may find it unwelcoming and forbidding in some
way. There could be difficulty keeping up with the amount of
work that goes into the maintenance of this ‘Private Estate’–it
may take a lot of time to look after the house and grounds. Who
does the work and who appreciates the luxury? Looking after the
lawn and the garden can bring a feeling of improved well-being.
Regardless of whether you’re a visitor or an occupant, going out
and looking at the beauty of the place, the plants and the wildlife,
can heighten your day.
Keywords: Glorious houses and estates. Lawns and gardens.
Statues and birdbaths. Peacocks, pheasants, swans, etc. Enjoying
the riches the environment offers. Large plots of land. Nature
reserves. Game birds. Aristocracy and the ruling elite. Beauty,
elegance and grace. Fabulous displays of color. Parks.
The Caution: Foolish disregard of pending danger. Feeling that
one has to be “on parade” or else they will be overlooked. Issues
of standing out from the crowd. Jealousy and envy through things
on display. Luxury and beauty or snobbery that excludes. Showing
off. “Do not enter” and "Keep Off The Grass" signs.
Capricorn 11
Fine feathers make fine birds.
Traditional Proverb
It is not only fine feathers that
make fine birds.
Aesop
It is not that the French are not
profound,but they all express
themselves so well that we are
led to take their geese for swans.
VanWyck Brooks
Few rich men own their own
property.The property owns
them.
Robert Greene Ingersoll
The more things accumulate the
more life is wasted because they
have to be purchased at the cost
of life.
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh
—(a man with some 90 Rolls
Royces)
He enjoys true leisure who has
time to improve his soul’s estate.
Henry DavidThoreau
And as you consider the ways
of surrender and which way the
Buddah sat,
You're just trying on a hat.
Paul Smyth
Somebelieveallthatparents,
tutors,andkindredbelieve.
Theytaketheirprinciplesby
inheritance,anddefendthemas
theywouldtheirestates,because
theyarebornheirstothem.
AlanWatts

<<<PAGE 305>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
282
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A STUDENT OF NATURE LECTURING,
REVEALING LITTLE-KNOWN
ASPECTS OF LIFE
Commentary: ‘A Student of Nature Lecturing, Revealing Little-
Known Aspects of Life’ is an image of someone who’s studied the
lessons that life teaches and is now giving that knowledge out
to others so they can learn and benefit. This Symbol reflects the
disconnection of modern thinking from ‘Nature’ along with the
disappearance and loss of the more holistic structure of life. The
people who are listening to the ‘Student’ may be in awe of how
much he or she knows about the subject, especially as they are
hearing about the ‘Little-Known Aspects of Life’. The ‘Student’
who’s ‘Lecturing’ may know a lot or perhaps they’re sharing the
rudimentary insights they have gleaned.
Oracle: Many have forgotten, or never learnt, some important
things about life and it’s by reconnecting with ‘Nature’ that we
can start to redress the imbalance. It may be that too much weight
has been given to the needs of modern society, to technology for
instance, and now it is time to seek a more alternative viewpoint.
We can teach or we can access knowledge through others who
specialize in these subjects; they have done the footwork in
gathering the relevant information. In other words, we can use
the tools of intellectualism that have actually disconnected us from
the world in order to reconnect our awareness. However, it may
be that nobody much cares what the ‘Student’ that is ‘Lecturing’
has to say—it depends how the message is delivered and whether
others really want to listen. In the situation facing you, you can be
an example to others of somebody who understands the wonders
of ‘Life’. Practical certifications and applications of knowledge may
or may not matter. Lecturing or telling stories of the wonders
of life can inspire others to greater heights in their own lives.
Revealing the truth of something can lead to wonder and awe, but
it can also lead to disbelief, it really depends on how the message
is received.
Keywords: Observing and translating so others may learn. Green
politics. Issues the conservatives don’t want revealed. Nature and
natural remedies. Science and its rewards and drawbacks. Issues
such as global warming. Whistle blowers. Natural healing methods.
Documentaries. Conspiracy theories.
TheCaution: Radical non-humanistic views. Intellectual smugness.
‘Lecturing’ and browbeating. Modern technological advances that
stifle the environment. Lip service to conservation issues.
Capricorn 12
The study of Nature is
intercourse with the Highest
Mind.You should never trifle
with Nature.
Louis Agassiz
It is not easy to describe the sea
with the mouth.
Kokyu
The Sun,with all the planets
revolving around it,and
depending on it,can still ripen
a bunch of grapes as though it
had nothing else in the Universe
to do.
Galileo Galilei
The happiness of the bee and
the dolphin is to exist.For man
it is to know that and to wonder
at it.
Jacques Cousteau
Nature never says one thing
and wisdom another.
Decimus Junius Juvenalis
Nature uses human
imagination to lift her work of
creation to even higher levels.
Luigi Pirandello
If you would thoroughly know
anything,teach it to others.
Tryon Edwards
Nature that framed us of four
elements,warring within our
breasts for regiment,doth teach
us all to have aspiring minds.
Christopher Marlowe

<<<PAGE 306>>>
CAPRICORN
}
283
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FIRE WORSHIPPER MEDITATES
ON THE ULTIMATE REALITIES OF
EXISTENCE
Commentary:‘AFireWorshipperMeditatesontheUltimateRealities
of Existence’ pictures someone who’s very focused on finding the
core truths of ‘Reality’ and the depth and breadth of what it really
means to ‘Exist’. ‘Fire Worshipping’ comes from the religion of
Zoroastrianism, and is a branch of Vedism. The term Zoroastrianism
comes from the Persian prophet Zoroaster or Zarathustra about 630-
541 BC. Whilst a young man, he began having conversations with
Ahura Mazda, the “Lord of Wisdom”. Fire was seen as the Creative
God,asitwassaidtopurifypeople,especiallythosethatitconsumed.
'Magian’ is another word for ‘Fire Worshipper’ and can be used to
denote an astrologer. Many rituals were observed, amongst these
the sacred ‘Fire’ needed to be kept glowing in the home and also in
the heart and mind.
Oracle: In your situation, you may find yourself very focused, with
a great passion for getting to the core, or the truth, of the ‘Ultimate
Realities of Existence’. You may need to shut out extraneous sights,
sounds and outside influences that distract or worry. By turning
inward, examining your situation and being on the alert for any
messages that come your way, either from God or from your higher
self, you will see in a way you’ve never done before. There can be
a sense of danger, but also fascination as things are revealed to you.
This can picture new beginnings. There may be a need to harness
personal resources. This Symbol is often about creating magic. Look
through appearances to get to the heart of things. Alternatively, it
can picture someone who goes to fanatical lengths to understand or
promote something. This Symbol often calls into question the true
meaning of the material things of life; do they get too much or too
little attention?
Keywords:Self-conquest.Kundalinienergy.Playingwithdangerous
elements to reach a higher state of being. Philosophy. The stories
of our lives. Examining life and its meaning. The buzz of being
alive. Questions of our very existence. Finding the reasons behind
everything. Contemplation and meditation. Incense. The hypnotic
spellthatfirecancast.Staringintotheflames.Throwingoneselfinto
the deep end. The search for core truths.
The Caution: Overestimation of personal power and abilities.
Obsession to the point of self-obliteration. Being intense. Going too
deeply. Exhausting oneself. Excluding family and friends because
of philosophical or spiritual convictions. Not seeing the woods for
the trees.
Capricorn 13
Knowingtrees,Iunderstandthe
meaningofpatience.Knowing
grass,Icanappreciatepersistence.
Hal Boreland
The instinct to worship is hardly
less strong than the instinct to
eat.
DorothyThompson
Genius-worship is the inevitable
sign of an uncreative age.
Clive Bell
An egotist is a self-made man
who worships his creator.
John Bright
We have become a generation
of people who worship our work,
who work at our play,and who
play at our worship.
Charles Swindoll
If only the sun-drenched
celebrities are being noticed and
worshiped,then our children
are going to have a tough time
seeing the value in the shadows,
where the thinkers,probers and
scientists are keeping society
together.
Rita Dove
Great moments in science:
Einstein discovers that time is
actually money.
Gary Larson
The logic of words should yield
to the logic of realities.
Louis Brandeis

<<<PAGE 307>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
284
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ANCIENT BAS-RELIEF CARVED IN
GRANITE REMAINS A WITNESS TO A
LONG-FORGOTTEN CULTURE
Commentary: ‘Ancient Bas-Reliefs Carved in Granite’ often
show gods or goddesses in scenes of life from the past. We see
these icons in museums and books, portrayed in photographs,
statues, carvings, and other images. As it ‘Remains a Witness
to a Long-Forgotten Culture’, many things can be learnt from
these ‘Bas-Reliefs’ about history, cultures and their remains. An
archeological dig can turn up incredible insights and answers to
the way mankind lived long ago.
Oracle: Some things never fade. They stand as reminders of
ancient eras, bringing messages, being ‘Witnesses’, from the
past. They remind us of how life and civilization was in ‘Long-
Forgotten Cultures’. Messages may be found in these reminders
about the stability and the longevity of the foundation of your
society, or possibly that of some other culture, however distant
in time and space. It could be something that resonates with you
or draws you. Spiritual messages may be coming out of the past
(or out of time and space), perhaps speaking through ‘Granite’,
concrete or things “written in stone”. This can be very enriching
and rewarding as these things can be beautiful remnants of the
past, reminders of how life used to be. However, they can also
be attitudes, beliefs and self-defeating attitudes that have etched
themselves into our very lives and are now difficult to erase.
Therefore, sometimes we must be careful not to be looking back
too much as we can lose the beauty and the reward inherent in
the present and in the everyday things that are around us. We
can feel stuck and frozen if we’re not able to move on in the life
we live in the here and now. This can also apply to the rules of
our culture or the common practices of an individual’s heritage,
family history or even past life experiences. These can be an
undertone to current realities and times.
Keywords: Anonymous immortality. Things written or carved
in stone, or concrete. Permanent records. Clues from the past.
Things that should be shaped and changed with the times. Pieces
of art or sculpture. Things that belong in a museum. Inscriptions
and carvings. Ancient civilizations and their relics. History.
The Caution: Limitations that don’t allow for changes. Old and
outworn situations. Things that can not, or will not, ever change.
Memories frozen in time. Feeling stuck, like no growth is possible.
Frigidity of feelings.
Capricorn 14
Man’s great power of
thinking,remembering,and
communicating are responsible
for the evolution of civilization.
Linus Pauling
INSCRIPTION,n.Something
written on another thing—
mostly memorial,intended
to commemorate the fame of
some illustrious person and
hand down to distant ages ...
e.g.,the name of John Smith,
penciled on theWashington
monument.
Ambrose Bierce
Write your injuries in dust,your
benefits in marble.
Benjamin Franklin
Memories are like stones,time
and distance erode them like
acid.
Ugo Betti
History is the unrolled scroll of
prophecy.
James A.Garfield
Human history becomes more
and more a race between
education and catastrophe.
H.G.Wells
Either we make history or
remain a victim of it.
Anon
The ear is a less trustworthy
witness than the eye.
Herodotus

<<<PAGE 308>>>
CAPRICORN
}
285
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN A HOSPITAL,THE CHILDREN’S
WARD IS FILLED WITH TOYS
Commentary: ‘In a Hospital, the Children’s Ward is Filled With
Toys’ brings to mind an image of children in varying states of
health. They are in need of care, with doctors and nurses going
about their business. There’s the need for vigilant duty for the
physical and emotional needs of ‘The Children’. Some ‘Children’
will be playing with the ‘Toys’, whilst others may be sleeping or
too ill to respond with much energy or enthusiasm.
Oracle: There may be a need for caring shows of affectionate
concern, either for yourself or others. Simple things done to
promote healing can bring great relief to all concerned. The
fact that ‘The Children’s Ward is Filled With Toys’ reflects a
generosity of spirit. Service and the gift of healing are given,
especially to those who are younger or less able to look after
themselves without any expectation of reciprocal giving. The
purpose of the ‘Toys’ is to give the ‘Children’ a special treat and
is an acknowledgment of their value in society along with the
community’s concern for their welfare and good health. In times
of healing there is a need for simple pleasures and rewards to raise
one’s spirit. Showing kindness and nurturance to those who are
in need can lead to faster healing and allow people to take their
place back out in the world again. Listening to the needs of ‘The
Children’ is very important, as they can provide clues as to what
is really causing problems or happening in their lives. This can
picture a situation where many kinds of healing methods can be
employed, anything from ‘Toys’ and gadgets all the way up to state
of the art, up-to-date technology. However, sometimes a simple
smile, a special treat and some soothing words of encouragement
are more healing than one can at first imagine.
Keywords: Bringing simple gifts to the sick or disadvantaged.
Looking after one’s responsibilities. Nurturing people of
younger years or those who’ve had less growth. Workshops
held to improve one’s health; be it physical, mental, emotional
or spiritual. Drugs, crutches, cots, doctors, nurses. Waiting for
and needing individual attention. Waiting rooms. Magazines. Toys.
Gadgets. Puzzles. Games.
The Caution: Making a large generous show when one doesn’t
really care. Being dogmatic. Feeling in charge of healing and not
listening to what others have to say. Using gadgets instead of
simple human caring. Fear of things such as needles, etc. Being
greedy and wanting all the toys.
Capricorn 15
A hospital is no place to be sick.
Samuel Goldwyn
Societyisahospitalofincurables.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Do not mistake a child for his
symptom.
Erik Erikson
We are so fond on one another
because our ailments are the
same.
Jonathan Swift
I found in you a holy place
apart,Sublime endurance,
God in man revealedWhere
mending broken bodies slowly
healed My broken heart.
Vera Brittain
I want to walk into a room,be
it a hospital for the dying or a
hospital for the sick children,
and feel that I am needed.
I want to do,not just to be.
Princess ofWales Diana
One of the most difficult things
to contend with in a hospital is
the assumption on the part of
the staff that because you have
lost your gall bladder you have
also lost your mind.
Jean Kerr
In this era of affluence and of
permissiveness,we have,in all
but cultural areas,bred a nation
of over privileged youngsters,
saturated with vitamins,
television and plastic toys.
Judith Crist

<<<PAGE 309>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
286
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
SCHOOL GROUNDS FILLED WITH
BOYS AND GIRLS IN GYMNASIUM
SUITS
Commentary: ‘School Grounds Filled With Boys and Girls in
Gymnasium Suits’ brings to mind images of youthful people,
doing their exercises, playing with and enjoying each other on
a physical level. The ‘Boys and Girls’ learn how to interact with
each other in the ‘School Grounds’. There is the sense that they
are having fun, regardless of their individual level of fitness. Some
will be very good at sports and be the stars in the ‘Gym’ whilst
others are there because they want to join in the fun or because
they are instructed to be there and have no choice. Many of their
relationship lessons are first learnt here.
Oracle: This Symbol asks whether you’ve been neglecting your
physical well-being of late. Now is a good time to reestablish an
affinity with your body and your vitality. Spontaneous enthusiasm
and the joy of being truly “alive” and youthful can regenerate and
revive and bring about carefree contact with like-minded people.
Nourishing the body with good nutrition, being in the outdoors,
enjoying the company of others and the competition of sport can
enliven everyone’s spirits. Physical exercise is a necessary part of
the education of young people’s minds and bodies. Giving youth
the opportunity to learn how to play sport and the benefits of
the concepts of “fair play” amongst their peers leads to a healthy
society. However, discipline may need to be brought into this
situation. Children picking on others for things such as not being
clever physically, or not having a perfect body, etc., should be
discouraged as everyone has their own special talents and needs.
With this Symbol, there can be a form of “conscription” where
one has to wear a uniform when they may not want to.
Keywords: Developing muscular coordination. Sexual energy,
attraction or satisfaction. Playing, marching, competition, rivalry.
Singing songs of unity. New anthems for the young. The search
for identity. Being able to accomplish things on the physical level.
Physical fitness. Uniforms and uniformity. Gymnasiums. Exercise
equipment. Conscription. Being one of many. Learning how to get
along with the opposite sex. Bodybuilding. Level playing fields.
The Caution: Physical showing off for sexual attention.
Relationships based on purely physical or sexual attraction.
Having to do things that one isn’t capable of physically doing.
Not joining in.
Capricorn 16
They call it physical education,
but it feels like gym to me.
Lisa Simpson
Anatomy is destiny.
Sigmund Freud
The only reason I would take up
jogging is so I could hear heavy
breathing again.
Erma Bombeck
ACADEME,n.An ancient school
where morality and philosophy
were taught./ ACADEMY,n.
[from ACADEME] A modern
school where football is taught.
Ambrose Bierce
Champions aren’t made in
gyms.Champions are made
from something they have deep
inside them—a desire,a dream,
a vision.They have to have the
skill,and the will.But the will
must be stronger than the skill.
Muhammad Ali
A school without football is in
danger of deteriorating into a
medieval study hall.
Frank Leahy
Before the child ever gets to
school it will have received
crucial,almost irrevocable sex
education and this will have
been taught by the parents,
who are not aware of what they
are doing.
Mary Steichen Calderone

<<<PAGE 310>>>
CAPRICORN
}
287
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AYOUNGWOMAN SURREPTITIOUSLY
BATHING INTHE NUDE
Commentary: A ‘Young Woman’ is shown. She is ‘Surreptitiously
Bathing in the Nude’. Whether she’s lying in the sun, or ‘Bathing’
in a pool, she’s letting her body soak up the energy of the elements
without worrying about the constraints of clothing or the fear of
someone seeing her. She may be enjoying the delicious feeling
that comes from allowing her body to be caressed by the sun, the
wind or the water. Perhaps she’s surrendering to the impulse of
independence and freedom as she employs the right to enjoy her
body without worrying about what others may think or how they
will react.
Oracle: You may feel the need to be rid of the restraints that have
been imposed by social conditioning and its inhibitions. Although
there may be some feelings of being “exposed”, really letting go and
not worrying about being “seen” can lead to feelings of freedom.
This Symbol also speaks about the desire to break the “prudish”
rules of society. The restrictions set on us by society are often
against enjoying the physical body, and therefore prohibit openness
and the resulting fun. The inhibitions that society imposes are
often based on expressions of shame and criticism. This Symbol
can also bring up issues to do with one’s privacy and the desire
to enjoy personal freedom and independence. There should be a
sense of comfort within your self, but without the desire to impose
on others. It can also show the drive to reveal the real truth about
yourself to others. Be wary of really exposing yourself too readily
or too much to others, in the things you say or do, as you may do
better to keep things more to yourself. What is it that’s really being
revealed, and what is it that needs to be revealed? Getting the outer
layers of the situation off can show core realities that have so far
been avoided. Try swimming, or getting out in the sun, as this will
help ease up any tensions that are around.
Keywords: Confrontations with one’s self. Reconnecting with
nature. A desire to “reveal” oneself mentally, physically or
emotionally. Issues with weight. The manipulation of the female
form in the media. Exhibitionism. Learning to let go of extraneous
things. Confronting puritanism. Being at one with the environment.
Releasing inhibitions. Stripping. Streaking. Sun lotions.
The Caution: Suppression of natural attitudes. Bondage to social
inhibitions. Feeling “indecent” about one’s bodily responses.
Hiding one’s self away OR being an exhibitionist. Showing off
with no concern for other’s feelings. Shocking and surprising
behavior.
Capricorn 17
I think on-stage nudity is
disgusting,shameful and
damaging to all things
American.But if I were 22
with a great body,it would be
artistic,tasteful,patriotic and a
progressive religious experience.
ShelleyWinters
How much has to be explored
and discarded before reaching
the naked flesh of feeling.
Claude Debussy
I wouldn’t do nudity in films.
To act with my clothes on is a
performance.To act with my
clothes off is a documentary.
Julia Roberts
What spirit is so empty and
blind,that it cannot recognize
the fact that the foot is more
noble than the shoe,and
skin more beautiful than
the garment with which it is
clothed?
Buonarroti Michelangelo
A bare assertion is not
necessarily the naked truth.
George D.Prentice
From the American newspapers
you’d think America was
populated solely by naked
women and cinema stars.
Nancy Astor
Clothes make the man.
Naked people have little or no
influence in society.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 311>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
288
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE UNION JACK FLIES FROM A
NEW BRITISH WARSHIP
Commentary: ‘The Union Jack Flies From a New British Warship’ is
an image of the need for protection and control. It pictures having to
overseeandprotectalarge“empire”wherereliabilityandleadership
are vital to the welfare of the people. Having to make one’s presence
felt and to guard one’s territory can be a tiring responsibility, but
there is an awareness of the guidance and protection of “all who
went before”. Effective supervision needs to be employed to protect
what’s been won, sometimes at great cost, from others who might
wanttotakeitaway.Countries,andthingssuchassocialandpolitical
constructs,allthewaydowntotheindividual,needthissurveillance
and protection from those who might invade, attack or threaten.
We invest the “armed forces’ with this responsibility, so that we, as
individuals in society, may enjoy our secure lives.
Oracle: This Symbol is about the need to defend our ideals, lifestyle
or culture from outside influences. It is important to show one’s
power, but also to continually renew strength. This can be a show
put on for others, but also an affirmation of safety for yourself and
those who are in your circle of influence or protection. If there is a
threat from outside your boundaries, or from within, there needs
to be a swift response to snuff it out. However, if anarchy erupts
within the ranks, political ploys may be used such as the concept of
“divide and rule”—the political rule that government is more easily
maintained if factions are set against each other and not allowed
to unite against the ruler. Distrust or disrespect for “authority” can
lead to problems with people branded traitors. Having confidence
in your ability to hold, maintain and protect your own “turf” will
ensure others do as well.
Keywords:Colonialism.Protectionism.Thegovernment,bigbusiness
and the media. Class-consciousness. Power and political displays.
Displays of “law and order”. Border patrols and protection. Strength
and might. Nationalism. Royalty. The ruling elite. Supervision. The
armed forces. Patrols. Pitting people against each other. Empires.
Victory bringing riches. The mother country. The struggle against
decline. Flags. Imperialism. The Commonwealth. The rule of law.
The Caution: Artificial shows of strength. Bullying from the “big
guys”. Being armed “to the teeth”. Strong-arm tactics. Disrespect
for authority. People or institutions that throw their weight around.
Anarchy.Traitors.Beingantiestablishment.Socialdisintegration.War
games. Civil wars. Feeling squeezed by authority. Rebellion. Civilian
lives lost for political causes. Governing forces that deny individual
rights. Invasions. Being defensive.
Capricorn 18
Use power to curb power.
Chinese Proverb
Imuststudypoliticsandwarthat
mysonsmayhavelibertytostudy
mathematicsandphilosophy.
John Adams
Sail on,O Ship of State! Sail
on,O Union,strong and great!
Humanity with all its fears,With
all the hopes of future years,Is
hanging breathless on thy fate!
HendryWadsworth Longfellow
Councils of war never fight.
Proverb
FLAG,n.A colored rag borne
above troops and hoisted on
forts and ships.It appears to
serve the same purpose as
certain signs that one sees
on vacant lots in London—
”Rubbish may be shot here.”
Ambrose Bierce
I went to a very militantly
Republican grammar school
and,under its influence,
began to revolt against the
Establishment,on the simple
rule of thumb,highly satisfying
to a ten-year-old,that Irish
equals good,English equals bad.
Bernadette Devlin
Britainisnotacountrythatis
easilyrockedbyrevolution...In
Britainourinstitutionsevolve.We
areaFabianSocietywritlarge.
William Hamilton

<<<PAGE 312>>>
CAPRICORN
}
289
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHILD OF ABOUT FIVE CARRYING
A HUGE SHOPPING BAG FILLED
WITH GROCERIES
Commentary: ‘A Child of About Five’ is seen. He is ‘Carrying a
Huge Shopping Bag Filled With Groceries’. Although the ‘Child’
is only young, he has to act like a grown-up, or, at the very least,
like someone much older than his tender years. He probably has
to carry many other responsibilities as well. Perhaps his parents
aren’t able to physically or mentally carry the load themselves.
It may be that nobody else wants to. It could be that this young
person is mature for his age and feels the need, the necessity or
the desire, to act above the usual expectations. Further, it could
be that his parents want him to grow up with a strong sense of
responsibility.
Oracle: You may feel that you have been lumbered with
responsibilities beyond the normal dictates of your experience
and possibly beyond your safe or comfortable capabilities. Despite
being keen and enthusiastic, you should be mindful not to try
to do too much, too quickly. There can be a feeling of having so
much to carry in life that fears of your physical or mental health
can arise. Whatever your situation, there’s the need to play, be
creative and rest as well. If you can find a balance between having
fun and being youthful, and shouldering chores and jobs, you will
achieve a lot and not wear yourself out in the process. Being the
one who has to do things can crowd the consciousness and drum
out your sense of youth and creativity. Having to always spring
to attention and do the chores can lead to feelings of being used
and “used-up” before one’s time. If someone in your environment
is carrying too much of the load, perhaps you could lend a hand
and relieve them.
Keywords: Being the one everyone counts on to do the job.
Feeling weighed down. Having to carry the “bag”. Lifting heavy
weights and bearing the consequences. Taking on things above
and beyond what one should. Acting the grownup. Maturing
quickly. Looking after paperwork. Running errands. Providing
food and sustenance for everyone.
The Caution: Overloading the innocent and the inexperienced
without thought of the consequences. Taking on too much. Not
allowing for fun and carefree activities. Never being “off-duty”.
Joint, back and shoulder problems. Growing up too fast. Having
a serious attitude. Lack of childhood. Dropping the bundle.
Carrying the family's responsibilities.
Capricorn 19
Responsibilities gravitate to the
person who can shoulder them.
Elbert Hubbard
Loving a child doesn’t mean
giving in to all his whims;to
love him is to bring out the best
in him,to teach him to love
what is difficult.
Nadia Boulanger
A child of five could understand
this.Fetch me a child of five.
Groucho Marx
All business depends upon men
fulfilling their responsibilities.
Mahatma Gandhi
If anyone thinks he has no
responsibilities,it is because he
has not sought them out.
Mary Lyon
Man must cease attributing his
problems to his environment,
and learn again to exercise
his will—his personal
responsibility.
Albert Schweitzer
People need responsibility.They
resist assuming it,but they
cannot get along without it.
John Steinbeck
RESPONSIBILITY,n.A
detachable burden easily
shifted to the shoulders of God,
Fate,Fortune,Luck or one’s
neighbor.
Ambrose Bierce

<<<PAGE 313>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
290
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HIDDEN CHOIR SINGING DURING
A RELIGIOUS SERVICE
Commentary: ‘A Hidden Choir Singing During a Religious Service’
pictures the voices, music, celebration and worship of a group of
people, the ‘Choir’. They come together to celebrate a sense of
unity and community. As they are a ‘Hidden Choir’, they are the
often unseen support that helps us to celebrate the spiritual or
communal rituals and celebrations. Music raises the spirits, and
the sounds of voices can be very uplifting. Songs are sung with or
without music.Done well, it can sound almost “heavenly” to the
ears, hearts and minds of those who are present to hear, as well
as to those who participate.
Oracle: In the celebration of spiritual unity we are never truly
isolated, separate or alone. Be receptive to your feminine, intuitive
side; there are messages to be heard even though they may not,
at first, be apparent. There is a voice, or voices, to be heard in
moments of reverence, meditation, worship and giving thanks. The
‘Hidden Choir’ can be “voices” that remind us of our history, our
genetic background, even our past lives. Realize that you are not
alone, there are other people who feel the same things. Everyone
should feel that their voice can be heard. Women were long kept
from having a voice in “the Church”. Now the voices of women
are being heard more and more through orthodox halls. Do you
hear the ‘Choir’ and do you want to contribute? It helps if we keep
“in tune” with others as this allows us to either enthusiastically
join in the chorus or remain a little quieter and reserved without
feelings of embarrassment or discomfort. This Symbol can show
both the community support for the positive celebration of life
and the mindless chatter that goes on about issues to do with
ethics, morals, beliefs, ways of life, etc. The faces of the people,
the “Hidden Choir”, may not necessarily be recognized, but their
songs, words, opinions or voices can still be heard.
Keywords: Background messages. Voices not heard or noticed
before. Men, women and the church. Sensitivity to spirituality.
Speaking behind closed doors. Voices from “nowhere”. Melodies
from the past. Choirs, organs and organ music. Channeled voices.
Songs, sheet music. Hidden speakers. Clairvoyance.
TheCaution: Taking undue credit for group qualities. Keeping the
feminine out of the picture. Discriminating against people as not
being “spiritual” or finding that some just plain aren’t! Background
voices telling people how they should live. Using hidden messages
to manipulate people, sometimes through guilt. Gossip. Messages
that don’t make sense. Being afraid to sing.
Capricorn 20
What’s invisible sings,and we
bear witness.
Rita Dove
Let us be silent that we may
hear the whispers of the gods.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Music expresses that which
cannot be said and on which it
is impossible to be silent.
Victor Hugo
The hidden harmony is better
than the obvious.
Alexander Pope
Of course the music is a great
difficulty.You see,if one plays
good music,people don’t listen,
and if one plays bad music
people don’t talk.
OscarWilde
I like the silent church before
the service begins,better than
any preaching.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Religion’s in the heart,not in the
knees.
DouglasWilliam Jerrold
Itisdifficulttoproducea
televisiondocumentarythatis
bothincisiveandprobingwhen
everytwelveminutesoneis
interruptedbytwelvedancing
rabbitssingingabouttoiletpaper.
Rod Serling
Let us go singing as far as we
go:the road will be less tedious.
Virgil

<<<PAGE 314>>>
CAPRICORN
}
291
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A RELAY RACE
Commentary: ‘A Relay Race’ is an image of people working
together as a team. They are endeavoring to finish a ‘Race’ and
to win a victory, often for some higher cause other than their own
personal glory. This can be for their school, nation or ideals. As
this is a ‘Relay Race’, they take turns running and pass the baton
to another when the moment is right.
Oracle: You may sense that the end is in sight and the victory
achievable, but you’ll probably realize that you are only one
member of a team, with your own special task to perform. A
level of trust is required when you work with a team. It is vital
that everyone gives their best and doesn’t hold back. If someone
endeavors to run the whole race by themself, even if they think
it’s the right thing to do, it can be seen as a form of selfishness
where everything is put at risk because of the inability to share or
act cooperatively. The aim of each should be for the team to reach
the finish line, or the goal, regardless of individual performances.
In fact, it may almost be impossible to complete the course on
your own. For the best results, people should work together in this
situation, each taking their turn and their due rewards. Criticism
should be kept to a minimum. As long as each member of the
team has tried his or her best it is unwise to compare. You may
not be the one who actually crosses the “finish line”, but you will,
eventually, share in the glory of the group effort. However, if you
don’t know where the “finish line” is, it can lead to confusion as
you just keep running (or going for it), with no end in sight. The
interconnectedness of people in a shared endeavor leads to the
task being achieved. Just be watchful for when you should both
take on and pass the responsibility.
Keywords: Shared endeavor. Knowing when to hand
on responsibilities. Teamwork. Knowing when to finish.
Encouragement and trust. Sharing and cooperation.
Inheritances. Timing. Being competitive. Taking turns. Handing
on responsibilities. Split second timing. Hand eye coordination.
Having an on/off switch.
The Caution: Not letting go of control to another . Feeling
defeated through feeling that you don’t have the necessary
resources to win. Criticism and competitiveness. Acting only
for one’s best interests. Competitiveness in inter-reactions and
conversation. Butting in when others are talking. Expecting
others to do all the work or carry responsibilities. Not sharing
the glory or the rewards.
Capricorn 21
You have no control over what
the other guy does.You only
have control over what you do.
A.J.Kitt
I don’t compete with other
discus throwers.I compete with
my own history.
Al Oerter
If you can’t win,make the fellow
ahead of you break the record.
Anon
The few who do are the envy of
the many who only watch.
Jim Rohn
Life begins when you get out
of the grandstand and into the
game.
P.L.Debevoise
Great discoveries and
improvements invariably
involve the cooperation of
many minds.
Alexander Graham Bell
One man alone can be pretty
dumb sometimes,but for real
bona fide stupidity,there ain’t
nothing to beat teamwork.
Edward Abbey
Talent wins games,but
teamwork and intelligence win
championships.
Michael Jordan
Conversation is an art in which
man has all mankind for
competitors.
RalphWaldo Emerson

<<<PAGE 315>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
292
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GENERAL ACCEPTING DEFEAT
GRACEFULLY
Commentary: ‘A General’ is seen ‘Accepting Defeat Gracefully’.
He has to acknowledge a ‘Defeat’ of some kind and respond
without losing face. Being a ‘General’, this person is obviously
often a “winner”, respected for being in charge and in command.
Now there’s the need for acknowledgment of a loss or a ‘Defeat’,
or a backing down of some kind.
Oracle: There’s an old saying: Winning or losing doesn’t matter
as much as how you play the game. Through the acceptance
of ‘Defeat’, one can often discover important and valuable life
lessons. Merely making excuses can lead to the same mistakes
being made again and again, when there is no longer any point
in pushing matters. At a time of “surrender”, it is the way the
situation is handled that will be remembered the most. It is how
‘Gracefully’ you handle ‘Defeat’ that will be the measure of your
inner worth both to yourself and others. Sometimes it is wise to
concede when the “victory” or the “prize” is more valuable for
your opponent than yourself. Admitting that one has lost or is
prepared to give up can free you up to get on with your life and
more rewarding adventures. Learning from ‘Defeat’ can bring
strength of character. On a deeper level, ‘Defeat’ shows us that
we are neither perfect, nor indestructible. Is the objective, battle
or conflict really worth winning or pursuing? Going for revenge,
greed or glory can often prove to end up badly as things can turn
sour. Sometimes pushing your agenda can hurt your cause and
it’s better to back off and hold your tongue. Struggling to have
your point made or accepted may be self-defeating. This can
happen in simple everyday situations such as conversation with
others not understanding what you’re saying or doing. Realizing
that you’re not going to change others can lead to being able to
‘Accept’ things in a better light.
Keywords: True inner worth. Being a “good loser”. Learning
that every minor skirmish in life is not a major ‘Defeat’. Being
prepared to start again. Sacrificing things for the benefit of others.
Nobility of character. Letting go of the “charge” around anger.
Surrendering. Knowing when to let go.
The Caution: Being a “bad loser”. Feeling everything is going to
come out badly. Reliance on self-limitations. Seeing the negative
in everything. Losing what’s been worked for. Making excuses
to get out of tight situations. Betrayal and loss. Loss of support.
Surrendering too early. Giving up on life.
Capricorn 22
The greatness of a man’s power
is the measure of his surrender.
William Booth
Defeat is a state of mind.No
one is ever defeated until defeat
has been accepted as a reality.
Bruce Lee
A proud heart can survive a
general failure because such a
failure does not prick its pride.
Chinese Proverb
An unjust peace is better than a
just war.Cicero
Failureisnature’splantoprepare
youforgreatresponsibilities.
Napoleon
Always imitate the behavior of
winners when you lose.
Anon
The surrender of life is
nothing to sinking down into
acknowledgment of inferiority.
John C.Calhoun
Youdon’talwayswinyourbattles,
butit’sgoodtoknowyoufought.
Marjorie Holmes
But man is not made for defeat.
A man can be destroyed but not
defeated.
Ernest Hemingway
Part of the happiness of life
consists not in fighting battles,
but in avoiding them.A masterly
retreat is in itself a victory.
NormanVincent Peale

<<<PAGE 316>>>
CAPRICORN
}
293
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SOLDIER RECEIVING TWO
AWARDS FOR BRAVERY IN COMBAT
Commentary: ‘A Soldier’ is seen ‘Receiving Two Awards For
Bravery in Combat’. The ‘Soldier’ has been through a struggle
or ordeal and has come out in some way victorious. ‘Awards’
are given to the ‘Soldier’ for ‘Bravery in Combat’, with his
courage and skill being recognized and rewarded. Indeed, true
deeds of service, valor and ‘Bravery’ should be rewarded and
acknowledged in some way.
Oracle: We often need to be acknowledged for the issues
or causes we’ve fought for and the battles we’ve endured,
whether we come out on top, or not. In your situation, your
efforts may be recognized with some show of appreciation or
compensation. It may be that you need to recognize another’s
achievement, behavior, or ‘Bravery’. Perhaps someone actually
made it through by admitting defeat and pulling out when the
time was right. If we’ve been wronged by society in some way,
and shown ourselves to be strong and able to stand up to difficult
or threatening situations, there may need to be reparations paid,
money or rewards of some kind to make up for any trauma, lost
opportunities or loss of family or social life. There’s a warning
though, of the feeling of being desperate to win, regardless of the
cost. Sometimes people will fight over who is the most deserving
for being battle-scarred and who’s the braver or the stronger or
there’s a struggle over who deserves the ‘Award’, who put in the
most effort, and who has come out the victor in a situation. It can
be discouraging and disappointing if we feel we have to go into
‘Combat’ to prove the merit of our deeds, our life or our beliefs.
Sometimes we have to cut our losses before we end up plunging
into ‘Combat’ once again. Was the outcome worth what went
into it? If you can see the ‘Awards’ in a rewarding light, however
they manifest, you can turn your life into a victory showing your
power, strength and bravery.
Keywords: Desperate striving for recognition. Rewards for
involvement in tough situations. Medals and trophies. Tributes,
acknowledgments and benefits given or showered. Award
ceremonies. Posthumous awards. Giving thanks. Compensation.
Insurance and legal claims. Recompense for taking action.
The Caution: ‘Awards’ as Band-Aids to assuage guilt produced
in war. Expecting money or other rewards for doing anything
that one doesn’t want to. The ills, social and otherwise, of
combat fighting. Neurotic seeking of praise or acknowledgment.
Rejection lines. Bribery.
Capricorn 23
Try to get all of your
posthumous medals in advance.
Anon
When I stand before thee at the
day’s end,thou shalt see my
scars and know that I had my
wounds and also my healing.
RabindranathTagore
When someone does something
good,applaud!
You will make two people happy.
Samuel Goldwyn
To refuse awards is another way
of accepting them with more
noise than is normal.
Peter Ustinov
Courage is resistance to fear,
mastery of fear – not absence
of fear.
MarkTwain
One should use praise to
recognize what one is not.
Elias Canetti
Courage—a perfect sensibility
of the measure of danger,and a
mental willingness to endure it.
WilliamT.Sherman
Heroes may not be braver than
anyone else.They’re just braver
five minutes longer.
Ronald Reagan
I don’t deserve this award,but I
have arthritis and I don’t deserve
that either.
Jack Benny

<<<PAGE 317>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
294
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN ENTERING A CONVENT
Commentary: ‘A Woman’ is seen ‘Entering a Convent’. She needs
to spend time contemplating her inner thoughts and values away
from the pressures of society. This may be a lonely passage
and she may be disenchanted with the hassles, pressures and
complications of society. There needs to be times of inner work,
just as for outer work. Sacrificing one’s own needs for a time in
order to dedicate one’s life to the “big picture” can lead to an
understanding of how one fits into the scheme of things.
Oracle: There may be the urge, or the need, to go into a period
of silence or self-negation. Gathering in one’s thoughts in a quiet
place can lead to renewed faith and commitment to spiritual
values and therefore better experiences with friends, family
and relationships. For now, life may require you to go within
and examine issues without the noise, clamor and problems of
everyday life. Solitude can be self-affirming and life strengthening.
You can learn a lot about yourself by observing how you spend
your time. Spiritual practice can lead you to new and heightened
states of awareness. Just be careful not to shut yourself away to
such an extent that you feel resentful, lonely and unfulfilled.
Watch out that you’re not suppressing joy and spontaneity. Your
physical needs are very important, as are your spiritual and
emotional needs. Are you looking after the needs of your body?
Are you caring for your physical needs or do you perhaps feel, if
you’re alone, you’re not worth the effort? Periods of silence and
chastity can be good as these can heal, inspire and caress you
until it comes time to return back into the fold of the reality of
the everyday world again. The question is: How long can you stay
secluded from others and relationships? Are you going into the
‘Convent’ or coming out?
Keywords: Spiritual retreat. Sexual retreat. Losing the libido.
Withdrawing without thought of the future. Vows. Renouncing
things. Going within to find answers. Contact with higher
sources. Faith renewed. Giving up things for a greater cause.
Losing identity. Taking on new identities. Sacrifice. Opting out.
The rejection of marriage. Marriage with God. Longing for love
of a higher kind. Maintaining faith. Intense sexual experiences.
The Caution: Self-sacrifice to win sympathy. Neglect of self and
hiding away. Nosedives into obscurity. Crisis of faith. Feeling let
down by the world. Bad episodes again and again. Feeling devoid
of emotion. Escaping war. Losing all and seeking sanctuary. Self
denial. Forgetting how to enjoy life.
Capricorn 24
In confession… we open our
lives to the healing,reconciling,
restoring,uplifting grace of Him
who loves us in spite of what
we are.
Louis Cassels
Sometimes the answer to
prayer is not that it changes life,
but that it changes you.
James Dillet Freeman
There are things to confess that
enrich the world,and things
that need not be said.
Joni Mitchell
When you’re not feeling holy
your loneliness tells you you’ve
sinned.
Leonard Cohen
It is not easy to be a nun.It
is a life of sacrifice and self-
abnegation.It is a life against
nature.Poverty,chastity and
obedience are extremely difficult.
But there are always the graces if
you will pray for them.
Kathryn Hulme
I have been studying how I may
compare the prison where I live
unto the world.
William Shakespeare
The man who has begun to live
more seriously within begins to
live more simply without.
Ernest Hemingway

<<<PAGE 318>>>
CAPRICORN
}
295
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ORIENTAL RUG DEALER IN A
STORE FILLED WITH PRECIOUS
ORNAMENTAL RUGS
Commentary: ‘An Oriental Rug Dealer in a Store Filled With
Precious Ornamental Rugs’ is an image of the allure and the
beauty of fine things and the appreciation of fine craftsmanship.
‘Precious Ornamental Rugs’ can inspire awe with their beauty and
the fine work, dedication and time that went into making them.
The ‘Oriental Rug Dealer’ should believe in the true worth and
value of the ‘Precious Ornamental Rugs’ he is selling, as these
things are socially and culturally very valuable and useful. If he
doesn’t really believe in what he’s doing, others won’t respond
to his “sales pitch” and his customers will wander off leaving
him alone in the shop. His words and actions may be seen as a
sham of some kind, like a bogus or shifty “used-car salesman”.
Honoring one’s work or input into society is a necessary part of
feeling that one contributes to the social whole.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the beautiful and yet practical
products that society produces that protect and cushion us
from hard reality and give a sense of safety, warmth and security.
Taking pride in the products of our culture and selling useful and
beautiful things is a responsible position, and the claims that are
made about the products have to be tried and true. Having the
knack of buying and selling things is very useful in this situation,
but do you believe in what you’re buying or selling? Not taking
somebody seriously because of what they do as a profession
or how they conduct their business can be alienating for all
concerned. There may be the feeling of needing to reassess one’s
real attitudes and ideals. Further, you may feel the need to work
with the physical and mental practices of oriental traditions that
are available.
Keywords: Refinement of cultural understanding and values.
Appreciating excellence of quality. Always looking for a bargain.
Buying things at bargain prices and selling them at higher prices.
Bartering and trading. Charging a fair price. The sales pitch.
Second hand goods. Marketing. Promotions. Sales. Discounts.
Closing the sale. Being able to think on your feet.
The Caution: Bargaining only to personal advantage. Giving
undue significance to unworthy goods. The archetypal “car
salesman”. Talking to others merely to gain advantage. Not
appreciating the value of one’s goods.
Capricorn 25
What is a man if he is not a thief
who openly charges as much
as he can for the goods he sells?
Mahatma Gandhi
The buyer has need of a hundred
eyes,the seller of but one.
Proverb
Junk is the ideal product...the
ultimate merchandise.No sales
talk necessary.The client will
crawl through a sewer and beg
to buy.
William S.Burroughs
There are very honest people
who do not think that they
have had a bargain unless
they have cheated a merchant.
Anatole France
Advertising may be described
as the science of arresting
the human intelligence long
enough to get money from it.
Stephen Leacock
All virtue is summed up in
dealing justly.
Aristotle
Every one lives by selling
something.
Robert Louis Stevenson
Here’s the rule for bargains:‘Do
other men.For they would do
you.’That’s the true business
precept.
Charles Dickens

<<<PAGE 319>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
296
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A NATURE SPIRIT DANCING IN THE
MIST OF A WATERFALL
Commentary: ‘A Nature Spirit’ is seen ‘Dancing in the Mist of a
Waterfall’. The ‘Nature Spirit’ is a carefree and beautiful image of
effervescenceandfun.Nymphsare‘NatureSpirits’thatliveinwater;
they are divine manifestations of nature: of woods, groves, springs,
streams, rivers, etc. The ‘Nature Spirits’ dance in the ‘Mist’ because
they know to avoid the areas of heavy pressure in the ‘Waterfall’.
Even though the strength and power of emotional flow is in the
middle of the ‘Waterfall’, it is not possible to survive under such a
torrent for very long. It is not always good to assault oneself with
the full brunt of pressure from life.
Oracle: This Symbol can represent feelings of emotional lightness
and almost mischievous intentions. The deeper parts of feelings are
sometimes ignored, or rejected, as the ‘Spirit’ flits over the surface of
any troubles. ‘Nature Spirits’ should be carefree and able to express
themselves as they want. Go with your feelings and don’t worry
too much about social restrictions. Finding a comfortable and safe
place in a situation or place may be necessary. ‘Dancing’ and going
with your gut feelings can lift your spirits to new heights. Be aware,
however, that some people may not take your actions seriously. If
you feel like ‘Dancing’, there’s no need to worry that people might
see you. Indeed, it may be a really good idea for people to see your
light side, the one that can throw caution to the wind. Whilst this is,
essentially, a beautiful Symbol of a “lightness of being”, there may be
an element of feeling cut off from one’s body, or reality. Whatever,
your worries or burdens can lift, leaving you feeling lighter and
happier. Dance in ‘The Mist’, in the gentle mysteries that arise even
in the midst of life’s struggles. That is the true way of the ‘Nature
Spirit’; they’re not concerned with the inane problems of life.
Keywords: Effervescent spirits or escapism. Dancing in a carefree
manner. Water and fun. Peter Pan characters. Mountains, mists,
fog. Reveling in nature. Picking up subtle energies. Being healed
because of the heightened atmosphere (altitude). Celebrations of
the natural world. Waterfalls. Water spraying and dripping. Finding
one’s habitat. Chinese water-torture. Water nymphs, fairies and
nature spirits, devas, and angels.
TheCaution:Irresponsibility,avoidanceofrealsituations.Nottaking
anythingseriously.Flittingoff.Beinghelddownandrepressedwhen
one is longing for light relief. Feeling abused by pressure. Being
subjugated by cold, icy elements, thoughts or emotions. Tricks or
perceptions of the light. Fear of dark places.
Capricorn 26
SYLPH,n.An immaterial but
visible being that inhabited the
air when the air was an element
and before it was fatally
polluted with factory smoke,
sewer gas and similar products
of civilization.
Ambrose Bierce
Dance like no one is watching,
Love like you’ll never be hurt,
Sing like no one is listening,Live
like it’s heaven on earth.
William Purkey
The universe is full of magical
things patiently waiting for our
wits to grow sharper.
Eden Phillpotts
Discourse on virtue and they
pass by in droves.Whistle and
dance the shimmy,and you’ve
got an audience.
Diogenes
Light be the earth upon you,
lightly rest.
Euripides
Let your life lightly dance on the
edges ofTime like dew on the
tip of a leaf.
RabindranathTagore
One must still have chaos
in oneself to give birth to a
dancing star.
Friedrich Nietzsche

<<<PAGE 320>>>
CAPRICORN
}
297
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MOUNTAIN PILGRIMAGE
Commentary: ‘A Mountain Pilgrimage’ shows the human need
to strive further, to go places that few people go and to take
risks in the hope of reaching a somewhat “exalted” place. Taken
literally, a ‘Mountain Pilgrimage’ can be difficult, risky and even
downright life threatening, especially to those who are old,
frail, in ill health or simply unfit. However, the ‘Pilgrimage’ can
manifest on many levels, from wanting to reach and attain the
“highest office” in a company or a country, all the way to desiring
and striving for ascension to higher levels of other-worldly or
spiritual attainment.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, there may be a need to strive
and to learn more on your path to understanding and fulfillment.
You may feel the desire to follow those who have gone before
you in order to achieve a true sense of inner fulfillment and
achievement. The effort that you have to expend is sometimes
great, but, then, so can be the rewards. A keen sense of ambition
that knows few limitations or boundaries, can lead to the top,
even though it might be a steep climb. This ‘Pilgrimage’ can signal
the need to get back to the purer elements of life and finding
one’s spiritual grounding. The effort involved in the ‘Mountain
Pilgrimage’ can take you away from friends and family, and those
things that have been familiar and comforting to you. However,
you may be surrounded, sometimes above and sometimes below,
by people who share the same hopes and visions. These aren’t
necessarily the friends and family that you are used to sharing
your life with, but people you meet up with on the journey. Still,
this may be a lonely journey, whether you are with others or not.
Regardless, keep striving – it may be well worth the time and
effort as you work to reach your own ‘Mountain’ top.
Keywords: Ascent in consciousness. Spiritual, material, corporate
or political striving. Having an entourage of people (or wanting
one). Aloneness and separation. Setting off to somewhere else.
Going on a mission. Finding one’s spiritual grounding. Getting
back to the purer elements of life. Ambitions to get to the top.
Wanting the highest office in the land.
TheCaution: High moral stands with no depth of feeling. Feeling
“high above” others. Feelings of being, or acting like, an ascended
being. Haughtiness. Intellectual snobbery. People scrambling for
the top. The “tall poppy” syndrome. Ambitions that know no
bounds. People ridiculing others for their lesser position. Spiritual
or corporate struggling for position.
Capricorn 27
Climbmountainstoseelowlands.
Chinese Proverb
The man who removes a
mountain begins by carrying
away small stones.
Anon
Success is not counted by how
high you have climbed but by
how many people you brought
with you.
Wil Rose
It is the ultimate wisdom of the
mountains that a man is never
more a man than when he is
striving for what is beyond his
grasp.
James Ramsey Ullman
Do not seek to follow in the
footsteps of the wise.Seek what
they sought.
Basho
If you wish to know the road
up the mountain,ask the man
who goes back and forth on it.
Zenrin
Firstthereisamountain,then
thereisnomountain,thenthereis.
Zen Aphorism
Life at the top is financially
rewarding,spiritually draining,
physically exhausting,and short.
Peter C.Newman
Ability may get you to the top,
but it takes character to keep
you there.
JohnWooden

<<<PAGE 321>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
298
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGE AVIARY
Commentary: ‘A Large Aviary’ is shown. As it is ‘Large’, we can
assume that there are many birds living in it. During the day, the
‘Aviary’ is a hive of activity, with the birds jumping around and
chirping and being generally busy. The birds hardly stop, they
jump from one spot to another, whilst communicating with each
other and eating and drinking. The ‘Aviary’ can almost be like a
beehive, with lots of noise and high energy. At night, it falls silent
with all the birds sitting asleep on their perches.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, there is likely to be a lot of
chattering, twittering and flitting around going on. Whilst there
is no harm being done, there’s probably nothing much really
being achieved. Is this because there is a level of mental confusion
happening? Perhaps this is because things change constantly,
and there’s a lot of noise and distraction. Many “voices” can be
heard in the ‘Large Aviary’, but it can be hard to discern just
one particular voice, that is unless that one voice comes from
someone who is much larger or very different from the others. At
least there is likely to be a feeling of brotherhood and not being
alone in your situation. This Symbol can point to situations with
many people; like “birds on perches” everywhere, all speaking
at once and having lots to say. Also, although you are able to
wander a little, you are actually caged into a particular reality.
This Symbol can picture the ways of bureaucracy, government
or big business. Sometimes the telephone and the Internet can
feel like the ‘Large Aviary’, especially if you never get to talk to
a real live person!
Keywords: Clairaudience. Hearing many inner voices. Having
a huge entourage or crowd. Tinnitus. Enormous activity. Many
people living their individual lives in one space. Blocks of flats
and units. Housing estates. Birds, aviaries, bird seed. Perches.
People chattering. Girls sharing. Lots to say. Little true content.
Confined living spaces. Communicating solely with those in the
immediate environment. Living in a world of one’s own with no
thought of the realities of how other people live. Having to get
along with others. Caged birds.
The Caution: Mental confusion bringing a lack of discernment.
Too much chatter with not much being achieved. False sense
of freedom. Chattering more than doing. Finding it hard to find
peace, harmony or privacy. Lonely existences. Abandoned living
spaces. Dependence on external sources of nourishment or other
provisions.
Capricorn 28
You cannot prevent the birds
of sorrow from flying over your
head,but you can prevent them
from building nests in your hair.
Chinese Proverb
I hope you love birds,too.It is
economical.It saves going to
Heaven.
Emily Dickinson
In almost everything that
touches our everyday life on
earth,God is pleased when
we’re pleased.He wills that we
be as free as birds to soar and
sing our maker’s praise without
anxiety.
A.W.Tozer
We are involved in a life that
passes understanding and our
highest business is our daily life.
John Cage
I know why the caged bird
sings,ah me,When his wing
is bruised and his bosom sore,
When he beats his bars and he
would be free;It is not a carol
of joy or glee,But a prayer that
he sends from his heart’s deep
core.
Paul Laurence Dunbar
The heart of a woman falls back
with the night,And enters some
alien cage in its plight,And tries
to forget it has dreamed of the
stars,While it breaks,breaks,
breaks on the sheltering bars.
Georgia Douglas Johnson

<<<PAGE 322>>>
CAPRICORN
}
299
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN READING TEA LEAVES
Commentary: ‘A Woman Reading Tea Leaves’ shows someone
looking into a cup and being able to see and ‘Read’ signs and
meaning in things that most people would never stop to notice
or know how to make sense of. The patterns in the cup “speak”
to the woman. There’s no way of knowing how good she is at
interpreting what she sees: She may be a very experienced reader,
with a great depth of clairvoyance or intuition, or she may be
trying to see how much she can ‘Read’ into the ‘Tea Leaves’ in a
simpler, or experimental way.
Oracle: You may be open to the ability, or the need, for seeing
meaning through the catalyst of the simplest of everyday events.
It seems clear that you will receive messages about your situation
if you are open to “seeing” the signs. The Symbol of the ‘Woman
Reading Tea Leaves’ shows that such simple things as the ‘Tea
Leaves’ in the bottom of your cup are able to give indicators and
clues as to what’s coming up in the future or in your life right
now. One has to put aside skepticism and be able to embrace
trust and an intuitive knowing in order to be able to listen to the
messages that are all around you. Just be aware that this situation
doesn’t lead to looking for clues to things everywhere you look.
You can lose the gift of enjoyment and spontaneity if there is no
discrimination about where, and how often, you look for guidance
and answers. Don’t take everything verbatim, as the answers that
are given in this situation are often rather symbolic and may need
thoughtful interpretation. This may picture a situation where you
are able to see these meanings, or it can show that another will
perform this for you. Whatever, looking at things from a different
perspective can reveal previously hidden information and truths,
often in the simple things around you in the everyday world.
Keywords: Symbolism opening pathways to the spiritual center.
Seeing the signs. Seeing signatures in small things that others
miss. Intuition and clairvoyance. Creative visualization. Tea leaves
and coffee grinds. Non verbal cues. Rituals. Tea and sympathy.
Fathoming the depths of simple things. Predicting the future.
Seeking guidance and changes of fortune.
The Caution: Reliance on superstition or esoteric advice.
Constantly seeking assurance. Taking things literally, not
symbolically. Looking for answers or significance everywhere.
Small rewards for talents that should be more respected.
Capricorn 29
Methods for predicting the
future:1) read horoscopes,tea
leaves,tarot cards,or crystal
balls… collectively known
as“nutty methods;”2) put
well-researched facts into
sophisticated computer…
commonly referred to as“a
complete waste of time.”
Scott Adams
In tea the host is simplicity and
the guest elegance.
Matsudaira Naritada
Tea pot is on,the cups are
waiting,favorite chairs
anticipating.No matter what
I have to do,my friend there’s
always time for you.And there
is no trouble so great and
grave that cannot be much
diminished by a nice cup of tea.
Bernard-PaulTheroux
Tea is a cup of life.
Great-Grandma Jewel
Where there is tea there is hope.
Sir Arthur Pinero
The art of tea is a spiritual one
for us to share.
Alexandra Stoddart
Matrons,who toss the cup
and see the grounds of fate in
grounds of tea.
Alexander Pope

<<<PAGE 323>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
}
300
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DIRECTORS OF A LARGE FIRM MEET
IN SECRET CONFERENCE
Commentary:‘DirectorsofaLargeFirm’areseen‘MeetinginSecret
Conference’. The ‘Directors’ come together as there are decisions
to be made and plans to be discussed and pursued. Wherever those
in authority gather, they rule and govern outcomes for themselves
and others. A ‘Large Firm’ can manifest in any area of life—on an
emotional, spiritual or physical level.
Oracle: There can be a feeling of being out of direct control of the
decisions being made by the ‘Directors of a Large Firm’. No matter
how much you are on the “inside”, you may not be hearing all that
is being said. Hence, there’s a need to be cautious about what you
presume, or imagine, to be really going on. Are you involved in a
process without really knowing the bigger picture? You may be
excluded because you don’t really have enough knowledge of the
system, or have the authority, to make an informed decision or
to call the shots. However, you, or others, may just be “shut out”.
Things kept from others can be very painful, especially when the
truth comes to light. The belief that someone is spying on others, or
talking about them, can lead to a sense of paranoia with suspicion
of the motives pervading the atmosphere. Information may be
deliberately withheld as a way of maintaining power by secrecy.
Call on the appropriate knowledgeable friends or authorities, with
them you may be able to iron out the details. Some may not want
others to know what’s going on, or is that just how it looks from the
outside?ThisSymbolcanalsobeabouttheprocessingofinnerissues
and thoughts. Things may feel out of your control and influenced by
unknown forces. Be aware of what’s happening, although you may
feel as though you are being shut out, you can still make an effort to
be heard or at least make your presence felt. Strategies may need to
be made and carried out in the best way for all involved.
Keywords: Sharing innermost secrets. Confidential information.
Masterly control. Big guys calling the shots. Being too busy to
see people of “lesser” importance in your life. Rationing time.
Governments and secrets. Spies. Privy Councils. Planning and
plotting. Having a say in things. Doors. Whispers. Records of
meetings. Important meetings. Boards of directors and secretaries.
Conspiracies.
The Caution: Excluding some. Exploiting people or situations.
Elitism. Being controlled by those above. Decisions made behind
closed doors. Dark rooms and huddled people talking. Concealing
the truth from others. Cliques and committees. Suspicions of
motives.
Capricorn 30
Immense power is acquired by
assuring yourself in your secret
reveries that you were born to
control affairs.
Andrew Carnegie
Problems can become
opportunities when the right
people come together.
Robert Redford
Determine that the thing can
and shall be done,and then we
shall find the way.
Abraham Lincoln
Every thing secret degenerates,
even the administration of
justice;nothing is safe that
does not show how it can bear
discussion and publicity.
John Dalberg Acton
A meeting is an event where
minutes are taken and hours
wasted.
Anon
Corporation:Aningeniousdevice
forobtainingindividualprofit
withoutindividualresponsibility.
Ambrose Bierce–The Devil’s
Dictionary
Equal opportunity is good,but
special privilege is better.
Anna Chennault
You people are telling me what
you think I want to know.I
want to know what is actually
happening.
Creighton Abrams

<<<PAGE 324>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
301
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OLD ADOBE MISSION IN
CALIFORNIA
Commentary: ‘An Old Adobe Mission in California’ is a symbol
of man’s ability to take natural materials from the environment
to build something lasting and enduring that protects, sustains
and nourishes the community on every level. The ‘Old Adobe
Missions’ were built in the early days of California in an attempt
to bring civilization to this wild area. Although these ‘Missions’
hold a certain romance in history, people have polarized
perspectives of their actual significance. There’s the romantic
colonial version of altruistic Spanish missionaries and soldiers
laboring to bring religion and European culture to the backward
native peoples, and then there’s the revisionist version: white
intruders subjugating and persecuting the Indians, indoctrinating
them with religion, killing them off with strange new diseases
and obliterating their culture. Somewhere in the middle, the truth
can most likely be found.
Oracle: Sometimes it’s easy to assume that one’s beliefs are
right and that others need to be shown the “real truth” or a
better way to live their life. Efforts sometimes need to be turned
toward creating the infrastructure to pursue our beliefs and way
of life and this can enrich everyone’s lives. There is a need for
the provision of faith, love and shelter to those who require it.
However, the effort may be too big for some and may leave them
feeling “homesick”, “homeless” or without a cause. It may be a
case of someone trying to change or dominate the core beliefs of
someone else, causing emotional restriction and pain. The truth
to be remembered is that contributing to other's lives and caring
about people in a community is not about control, but acceptance
of, and reverence for, each person’s divinity. There’s no need for
strict conformity, manipulation or pretension here.
Keywords: Spiritual retreats in natural surroundings. Finding
new areas to work with spirit. Creating civilization out of natural
elements. Hard work to create places of sanctuary and learning.
Places once revered now tourist attractions. Forging links to new
worlds. Missions and missionaries. Bringing faith to the “new
world”. Brotherhoods. Places that house and protect.
The Caution: Dogmatism. Pushing beliefs and ideas on others.
Believing one’s spiritual and religious beliefs contain all the
answers. Taking over others' lives. Moving in and taking control.
Monuments to the past sagging and fading. People moving in on
others. Cults. Indoctrination.
Aquarius 1
A pile of rocks ceases to
be a rock when somebody
contemplates it with the idea of
a cathedral in mind.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
If a man cannot be a Christian
in the place where he is,
he cannot be a Christian
anywhere.
HenryWard Beecher
When the missionaries came to
Africa they had the Bible and
we had the land.They said,“Let
us pray”.We closed our eyes.
When we opened them we had
the Bible and they had the land.
DesmondTutu
The belief that there is only
one truth and that oneself is in
possession of it seems to me the
deepest root of all evil that is in
the world.
Max Born
It is easier to pull down than to
build up.
Proverb
In the beginning was the word
and it was misunderstood.
Native American Saying
Claim the vicinity in the name
of divinity.
SteveTripp

<<<PAGE 325>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
302
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN UNEXPECTED THUNDERSTORM
Commentary: ‘An Unexpected Thunderstorm’ symbolizes
something coming out of the blue. It may be sudden, confronting,
overwhelming and somewhat frightening. Thunderstorms,
especially those that are ‘Unexpected’, are awesome powerhouses
of energy that can unleash incredible levels of tension and release.
However, ‘Thunderstorms’ often clear the air after an extreme
buildup of energy, and can leave us with a sense of awe and
wonder at the extreme power, majesty and beauty of natural
events. Flashes of clarity often come like bolts of lightning that
shoot through one’s mind, spirit and body. When the air clears,
there can be a purging or clearing up of issues through incredible
states of illumination.
Oracle: You may find that you are suddenly tested, taken by
surprise or something shattering arises. This can overtake and
overawe your sense of stability, and can happen when you least
expect it. Perhaps you saw signs of something big coming, but
didn’t quite know what to expect, or what was going to be
unleashed. Your inner strength and stability is likely to be put
to the test however you can learn a lot from the experience,
especially if you strive to stay at the center of the ‘Storm’ and
not get swept up and away by it. In fact, the effect can be quite
liberating, after the initial shock. The best course of action to take
is to not panic, but to see your true place in the scheme of things
and help others cope with what’s going on. You may need to let
go of control in this situation, as trying to be in charge of what’s
happening may well be impossible. Endeavor to be a conduit for
the unleashed energy in some way; let the energy run through
you and into the ground. Stay with the feeling of grounding the
energy as much as possible. When the 'Storm' passes, assess what
you can fix up.
Keywords: Sudden visitations of natural wonder. Something that
drops on you, seemingly from out of nowhere. Things erupting
and happening fast. Storms in a teacup. Shocks and confrontations
with raw energy. Thunder, lightning and electricity. The Tower
card of the tarot. Being a lightning rod. Water and rain that
quenches and revives. Things being unleashed.
The Caution: Losing control without warning. Emotional
instability. A “back draft” of emotions. Bottling up and blowing
up. Confused by sudden outbursts. Loud bangs and crashes that
shock and stun. Seizing up with fear. Sudden unleashing of
emotions. Hurricanes of messy energy.
Aquarius 2
The cosmos comes forth from
The Eternal,and moves In Him.
With His power it reverberates,
like thunder crashing in the sky.
Those who realize Him pass
beyond the sway of death.
Upanishads
Lightning is the shorthand of a
storm,and tells of chaos.
Eric Mackay
Clouds that thunder do not
always rain.
Armenian Proverb
Do not the most moving
moments of our lives find us
without words?
Marcel Marceau
Times of general calamity and
confusion create great minds.
The purest ore is produced
from the hottest furnace,and
the brightest thunderbolt is
elicited from the darkest storms.
Charles Caleb Colton
Quiet minds cannot be
perplexed or frightened but go
on in fortune or misfortune at
their own private pace,like a
clock during a thunderstorm.
Robert Louis Stevenson
It is the flash which appears,the
thunderbolt will follow.
Voltaire

<<<PAGE 326>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
303
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A DESERTER FROMTHE NAVY
STANDS SUDDENLY AWARE OF
A DAWNINGTRUTH:FREEDOM IS
NEVERTHE RESULT OF COMPROMISE
Commentary:‘ADeserterFromtheNavyStandsSuddenlyAwareofa
DawningTruth:FreedomisNevertheResultofCompromise’shows
someone who’s come to the conclusion that staying in a situation
that stretches, tests or ‘Compromises’ his needs, desires and values
in some way is not worth the energy that has to go into it. Like being
in the ‘Navy’, perhaps he had signed up for something for the long
haul. He was expected to fulfill some employment, destiny, mission,
or perhaps staying committed to a relationship. Now there’s been
a realization that the mold cast for him just doesn’t work. It doesn’t
satisfyhisinnerdesiresandlongings.Hemayhavebeenabletoadjust
to the situation for a while, but the time has come when he has to
leave, bail out or jump ship.
Oracle: A decision to opt out may be based on moral or ethical
grounds, where someone doesn’t want to perform some duty or
act because it is against their principles, or in order to maintain a
sense of free spirit, mobility or independence. You may find that
the rigorous restraints and rules of the situation are no longer
comfortable, bearable or tolerable. This can be about you, or it can
be about someone (or something) else. Being “signed-up” to some
commitmentcanberestricting,limitingandsometimesconfronting.
There can be a feeling of being taken away from loved ones, home
and family for a reason you don’t really understand and not wanting
to accept the pressures of separation. However, it could be the exact
opposite—home and family life can be too constricting and there
may be a desire to leave to pursue another, more independent life.
However, there are always consequences for opting out, running
away or not playing the game. Are you prepared for them? Is there a
‘Sudden’ realization, ‘A Dawning Truth’ that what you’ve been doing
is not necessarily what you want to be doing?
Keywords:Rebellion.Leaving,althoughallegiancehadbeenpledged.
Optingoutbecauseofpressure,harassmentorbullying.Takingrisks
to get out of a dangerous/destructive/alienating situation. Being left
behind by someone who’s “jumped ship”. Going AWOL. Standing by
personal truths. Refusing compromise.
TheCaution: Not playing by the rules of socially structured games.
Self-ruin. Refusal to face social consequences. Not turning up.
Withdrawing support in a physical, emotional or spiritual way.
Blowing security. Rats deserting the sinking ship.
Aquarius 3
I had examined myself pretty
thoroughly and discovered that
I was unfit for military service.
Joseph Heller—Catch 22
A man must consider what rich
realm he abdicates when he
becomes a conformist.
RalphWaldo Emerson
His secret realization of his
physical cowardice led him to
underrate his exceptional moral
courage.
Vera Brittain
COWARD,n:one who,in a
perilous emergency,thinks with
his legs.
Ambrose Bierce
I was court-martialed in my
absence,and sentenced to
death in my absence,so I said
they could shoot me in my
absence.
Brendan F.Behan
There are two freedoms – the
false,where a man is free to
do what he likes;and the true,
where he is free to do what he
ought.
Charles Kingsley
The brave man inattentive to
his duty is worth little more to
his country than the coward
who deserts in the hour of
danger.
Andrew Jackson

<<<PAGE 327>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
304
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HINDU HEALER GLOWS WITH A
MYSTIC HEALING POWER
Commentary: ‘A Hindu Healer’ is someone capable of natural,
alternative and sometimes miraculous 'Healing'. He ‘Glows’ with
‘A Mystic Healing Power’ and inspires others to greater heights of
‘Healing’, understanding and 'Power' within themselves. A ‘Hindu
Healer’ channels the energy of God to manifest the ‘Healing’
process. There may be a need to heal wounds, illness, trauma,
or some other affected part of the body or mind. There is often
the sense of having to sacrifice for another. It can feel as though
the ‘Healer’ has a cleansed and enlightened soul together with
a sense of purity.
Oracle: This pictures being ‘Healed’ by someone who has
undertaken the rituals of learning, self-sacrifice and self-
knowledge. The ‘Hindu Healer’ can pass on the benefits of this
knowledge to the unwell through ‘Healing’ and purification. You
may not be having much success in solving problems logically and
rationally at the moment. The message is to look to your spiritual
center for genuine, lasting solutions. This requires focus, practice
and determination. You can heal yourself or others in some way by
using traditional spiritual methods. It could be that someone can
offer these methods to you, and this person could have a special
aura about them. Natural ‘Healing’ methods of any kind are likely
to work well in this situation as this ‘Hindu Healer Glows With
a Mystic Healing Power’. ‘Healers’ of any type are likely to enter
your life at this time. Indeed, your own healing ability may be
revealed to you. This is true especially if you concentrate your
energies on the issue that needs help. There may be a need to
leave the pressures of modern society for spaces that are much
calmer, more spiritual or self-focused. Take some time and effort
to tune in as the ‘Healing’ experience is occurring. Indeed, a
‘Mystic Healing’ experience could descend over you and change
your life forever.
Keywords: Divine healing potency. Natural healing methods.
Going on faith. Humility in the face of greatness. Yogis and
fakirs. Finding one’s center. Healers of all kinds. Glowing health.
Radiating love, spirit and calm. Tapping vast reservoirs of healing
forces. Reverence for simple methods. Auras that radiate. Urine
therapy. Pranic energy. Yogis. Reiki healing
The Caution: False claims of powers. Charlatans. Claims of
healing that are just manipulation. Snake-oil salesmen. Tricks
with smoke and mirrors. What to trust, what to believe? Orthodox
healing methods failing to cure. Feeling invincible.
Aquarius 4
The doctor is to be feared more
than the disease.
Latin Proverb
Just because your doctor has a
name for your condition doesn’t
mean he knows what it is.
Anon
Physician heal thyself.
The Bible
You already have the precious
mixture that will make you well.
Use it.
Rumi
Prayer,like radium,is a
luminous and self-generating
form of energy.
Alexis Carel
It requires a great deal of faith
for a man to be cured by his
own placebos.
John L.McClenahan
Natural forces within us are
the true healers of disease.
Hippocrates
Medicine can only cure curable
diseases,and then not always.
Chinese Proverb
It takes a wise doctor to know
when not to prescribe.
Baltasar Gracian
Nature is better than a middling
doctor.
Chinese Proverb

<<<PAGE 328>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
305
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A COUNCIL OF ANCESTORS HAS
BEEN CALLED TO GUIDE A MAN
Commentary: The ‘Council of Ancestors Has Been Called to
Guide a Man’ implies faith, trust and hope in the wisdom and
understanding of those who have gone before. The wisdom of the
‘Council of Ancestors’ is often invoked in tribal spiritual practice.
With this Symbol, whenever there is a need for guidance, wisdom
or knowledge, whether it is in the present or from the spirit world,
the energy of the elders can ‘Guide’ us. This ‘Guidance’ often comes
from the ‘Ancestors’ who have passed on, but can also originate
from the knowledgeable ones that are still among us.
Oracle: This Symbol reflects the energy and influence that is
always available to us through spiritual practice, meditation and
the willingness to seek help. You will find you are strengthened
by the wisdom of precedent; that which has gone before. There is
so much understanding available through the experienced elders
and this is what needs to be tapped, experienced, followed and
honored in some way. The ‘Council of Ancestors’ holds a storehouse
of knowledge and experience and this image suggests that they are
being called on to lead and ‘Guide’ you. An issue out of the past
may need to be brought to the present day and this can secure
much needed guidance and protection. Those who are older and
probably wiser in some measure have something valuable to teach
us and the time is probably right for this to come through now.
However, sometimes things from the past really belong in the past.
What the truth of the matter really is needs to be assessed by those
involved. Whatever, getting the “authorities” on your side will help
you achieve what you want. Listening and learning from those
above will lead, one day, to you being able to take charge in your
own good time. Sooner or later, you may find yourself invited to
join this ‘Council’, taking your own place of authority.
Keywords: Inner knowledge. Instruction. Direct tap roots to deep
sources of energy. Karmic connections with the past. The place
one comes from. Ancient wisdom versus “old fogies”. Parents and
grandparents. Families and family lineage. Proving bloodlines.
Committees, boards and councils. Memories of those who’ve
gone before. The Akashic records.
The Caution: Reliance on conservatism. Obsolete boards of
authority. Not being able to move with the times. Needing the nod
of approval from others to validate what one’s doing. Not being
free to do what one wants. Having to please the elders in some
way. Bound by family or past-life karma. Nagging negativity. Old
fashioned views that limit expansion.
Aquarius 5
We do not inherit the land from
our ancestors;we borrow it
from our children.
Native American Proverb
It is indeed a desirable thing
to be well descended,but the
glory belongs to our ancestors.
Plutarch
Others have done it before me.
I can,too.
Corporal John Faunce
Behind every able man,there
are always other able men.
Chinese Proverb
I write to keep in contact with
our ancestors and to spread
truth to people.
Sonia Sanchez
One cool judgment is worth a
thousand hasty councils.The
thing is to supply light and not
heat.
WoodrowWilson
Every man serves a useful
purpose:A miser,for example,
makes a wonderful ancestor.
Laurence J. Peter
Humans are not proud of their
ancestors,and rarely invite
them round to dinner.
Douglas Adams
Some families can trace their
ancestors back three hundred
years,but can’t tell you where
their children were last night.
Anon

<<<PAGE 329>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
306
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MASKED FIGURE PERFORMS
RITUALISTIC ACTS IN A MYSTERY PLAY
Commentary: ‘A Masked Figure Performs Ritualistic Acts in a
Mystery Play’ shows someone playing a role in some kind of ‘Act’
or drama. This can be for the sake of ‘Ritual’, or it can convey a story
or message to those observing. Churchmen on church premises
performed the original ‘Mystery Plays’ in Latin. They depicted such
subjects as the Creation, Adam and Eve, the murder of Abel, and the
Last Judgment. As time went on, the ‘Plays’ left the Church and took
to the cities and the once strictly religious themes changed into less
reverent themes. Nowadays, ‘Mystery Plays’ are rather different.
Oracle: In the situation facing you it seems there are ‘Mysteries’ in
the themes that are being played out, perhaps to the point where it’s
not clear exactly what’s going on and who, or what, the actors, the
‘MaskedFigures’,trulyare.However,itmaybethattheaudience,and
this can be you or someone else, is not really supposed to know the
ins and outs of what’s really going on. It can feel that everything and
everyone is not quite how they seem. Issues of faith and trust may
come up. There could be the sense that you are not being shown
the true face of the situation. Look to see who the performers are in
this ‘Mystery’. Are you part of the ‘Play’ or are you in the audience?
Sometimes people have a need or desire to be cautious in what
they reveal of themselves to others. Does someone in this situation
find it necessary to put on an ‘Act’ in order to cover up their real
intentions, emotions or reactions? It’s quite likely that false motives
will eventually be uncovered, so be wary of what actions are taken,
and be cautious with what’s said. There may be a desire to perform
somekindof‘Ritual’or‘Act’,evenifyou’renotsurewhatyou’redoing
or where it will lead you. This can picture someone living out his
or her life in a type of ‘Mystery’ or charade and not really knowing
what turn life is going to take next. There may be concerns about
how one truly fits into the story that’s being played out.
Keywords: Rituals. Shamanism. Archetypes of personality. Putting
on a show. Portrayals of performances that don’t always add-up. The
unmasking of someone. Comedy. Banditry. Mystery. Drama. Acting.
Rituals. Executioner’s masks. Smoke screens. Doing the technical
but not the emotional. Saying or doing things because they “should”.
Having alternate personalities.
The Caution: Neurotic performances. Putting on superficial acts.
Carrying out “rituals” without being aware of why. Sticking to
tradition. Unwilling to admit to changing times. Not knowing who
the players are or what the plot is. Being unsure of direction. Lying.
Cover-ups. Deceptions. Tricks. Ploys to manipulate.
Aquarius 6
My life has a superb cast but
I can’t figure out the plot.
Ashleigh Brilliant
My life has a brilliant plot but I
can’t figure out the cast.
Lynda Hill
Hope for the best.Expect the
worst.Life is a play.We’re
unrehearsed.
Mel Brooks
Life is not a dress rehearsal.
RoseTremain
It is not whether you really cry.
It’s whether the audience thinks
you are crying.
Ingrid Bergman
We wear the mask that grins
and lies,It hides our cheeks and
shades our eyes,This debt we
pay to human guile ...But let
the world dream otherwise,We
wear the mask!
Paul Laurence Dunbar
Real life seems to have no plots.
Ivy Compton Burnett
People don’t change.Only their
costumes do.
Gene Moorse
I liked myself better when I
wasn’t me.
Carol Burnett

<<<PAGE 330>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
307
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHILD BORN OUT OF AN
EGGSHELL
Commentary: ‘A Child Born Out of An Eggshell’ shows something
being ‘Born’ in a way that was probably never expected; it is ‘Born
Out Of An Eggshell’. Alchemists saw the ‘Egg’ as the container for
both matter and thought. This led to the concept of the Cosmic
Egg or World Egg, a cosmic symbol in many traditions. The vault
of space came to be seen as an ‘Egg’, and this ‘Egg’ consisted of
seven layers, each enfolding the other, showing the seven heavens
or spheres. The Chinese believed that the first man sprung from
an ‘Egg’. This image is around us in many ways, from invitro-
fertilization to human cloning.
Oracle: This Symbol signifies innovative ways of doing things,
with new directions and new solutions. You need to find a unique
approach that will give you the ability to follow unusual and
original paths leading to a new emergence. There’s the possibility
of unleashing rebellious energy, so make sure that this beginning
doesn’t start off with any precocious or “spoilt” attitudes. It is
important to provide nourishing environments in order to grow
and learn, and nourishment must be provided to last through the
course of the development. There can be an uneasy or unsure
feeling about the viability of your situation. Many ideas or projects
die because they don’t have enough initial capital or support or
dedication to last the distance. It may be something out of the
ordinary or slightly odd. Don’t let this scare you; try to recognize
the potential rewards and see what you can learn from it. This
Symbol can also show prejudice or fear of things that are different.
There may be the need to be more consciously tolerant towards
people or situations no matter their origins or backgrounds. This
can also represent the gestation of an idea, process or project
that’s outside your direct influence.
Keywords: Transmutation. The birth of a new creative original
impulse. Incubated ideas coming to fruition. Genetic engineering.
Invitro fertilization. People beyond their time. Mutations. Seeking
the unusual. The unexpected birth. The desire to have children.
The nurturing egg. Emerging in a unique way. The matrix and
the casket. The struggle to break free. Genetic engineering.
Indigo children. Children that seem unrelated to their parents.
Adoption.
The Caution: Being different only to follow fashion. Afraid of
new ideas. Lack of support. Spoilt and naive attitudes. Rebellion.
Uneasiness. Prejudice and racial stereotypes. Refusing to believe
even what the eyes can see.
Aquarius 7
In the beginning,all the universe
was non-being.It became being.
It grew and formed an egg,
which remained unbroken for a
year.Then it broke open.Of the
two halves of the shell,one was
of silver and the other of gold.
The Upanishads
First there was the Great Cosmic
Egg.Inside the egg was chaos.
Floating in the chaos was P’an
Ku,the undeveloped divine
embryo.
Huai-nanTzu
The creator,Awonawilona,
thought himself into being.
Zuni Indian Saying
‘Ex ovo omnia.’Everything from
an egg.
William Harvey
Man’s main task in life is to give
birth to himself,to become what
he potentially is.
Erich Fromm
We are all cells in the same body
of humanity.
Peace Pilgrim
The shell must break before the
bird can fly.
Lord AlfredTennyson
Donotcomputethetotalityof
yourpoultrypopulationuntilall
themanifestationsofincubation
havebeenentirelycompleted.
William Jennings Bryan

<<<PAGE 331>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
308
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
BEAUTIFULLY GOWNED WAX
FIGURES ON DISPLAY
Commentary: ‘Beautifully Gowned Wax Figures on Display’
pictures a situation of the enjoyment, even the glorifying, of
physical beauty, shape and form. When we see ‘Beautifully
Gowned Wax Figures’ it can be rather startling; we may get
caught out for a moment, thinking they are real flesh and blood.
These ‘Wax Figures’ can be like “mannequins” in a store window
or they can be people who fuss and care about how they look
more than care how they relate as real human beings.
Oracle: It is not enough to just look and play a part; we must
know and live that part as well. Although there may be the desire
to present one’s self in a beautiful and manicured way, it is also
necessary to know how to “walk your talk”. Being well rehearsed
and fully aware of fulfilling one’s role can lead to people being
pleased and impressed with this ‘Display’. This Symbol can also
show elements of a situation that are too superficial, driven
externally by society or events, or have only been allowed to have
a shallow influence. Something, or someone, may look good on
the outside for some time, but what’s truly going on inside? Are
issues of ‘Beauty’ involved, here? Or “heart-less-ness”? There’s
often the choice of hiding one’s internal feelings in a display
of elegance, beauty or fashion, however, being stiff, uncaring
and robotic can lead to people being alienated or disillusioned.
External appearances need the heart’s warmth to give life; is
warmth missing in this situation? If there’s plenty of substance
involved, the display of ‘Beauty’ will bring nothing but good.
Keywords:Settingstandards.Exemplarsofsocialritual.Superficial
values on display. Superficial beauty or avatars of fashion? Not
showing true feelings. Beauty salons, modeling. Judging a book by
its cover. No substance. Pretty on the outside. Positions of power
and privilege that seem unreal. Models. Beauty and its allure. Store
dummies. Money spent on appearances. Always having to look
good. The need for real flesh and blood responses.
The Caution: Putting on a false front. Expecting to be noticed.
Acting “wooden” about something. Not contributing anything of
real value. Beauty that has no “voice”. Lack of depth and integrity.
Fake responses. Acting only for social acceptance. Bloodless
realities. Lifeless figures. Obsession with beauty and fashion.
Judging others without regard for their humanity. Emotionless
realities. Being a "Handbag" wife or husband.
Aquarius 8
In order to be irreplaceable one
must always be different.
Coco Chanel
One should either be a work of
art,or wear a work of art.
OscarWilde
People see you as an object,not
as a person,and they project
a set of expectations onto you.
People who don’t have it think
beauty is a blessing,but actually
it sets you apart.
Candice Bergen
Fashion is a potency in art,
making it hard to judge between
the temporary and the lasting.
E.C.Stedman
Nothing’s beautiful from every
point of view.
Horace
Clothes make the man.
Latin Proverb
It is an interesting question
how far men would retain
their relative rank if they were
divested of their clothes.
Henry DavidThoreau
Clothes make the man.Naked
people have little or no influence
in society.
MarkTwain
You may turn into an archangel,
a fool,or a criminal;no one
will see it.But when a button is
missing,everyone sees that.
Erich M.Remarque

<<<PAGE 332>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
309
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FLAG IS SEEN TURNING INTO AN
EAGLE
Commentary: A ‘Flag Turning Into an Eagle’ represents
nationalistic ideals and values being taken to their highest level.
The ‘Flag’ and the ‘Eagle’ are both symbolic representations
of these strong ideals. The ‘Flag’ is a pictorial representation
of a nation or a country’s spirit, and the ‘Eagle’ is the physical
manifestation of that spirit. As ‘the Flag’ turns into ‘the Eagle’, the
feeling of spirit is transformed into a physical expression of that
ideal; they are made physical and become more realistic.
Oracle: This Symbol reflects the need or desire for our inner
thoughts to become manifest into daily life practice. Your core
beliefs can be seen as your ‘Flag’ and your announcements of
and allegiance to them is like the ‘Eagle’. You may find that you
are being asked to no longer just project an image, but to own
your own true power. In more dramatic situations, one may feel
like they have been reborn, or suddenly become more motivated
or inspired to carry through actions that they have previously
only thought about. However, not everybody will agree with or
believe in the ideals behind one’s actions and words. Someone
may be “blowing their horn” about issues that others might not
want to salute. Be aware that although you may have experienced
a personal transformation, not everyone will be keen to hear
about it in great detail. Others may be thrilled at your successes
and want to hear all about them. On the other hand, you may
be doing a lot more talking than action, but that will most likely
change soon. Be sure to retain your modesty and gauge others’
reactions accordingly. With a positive focus you can watch your
ideas take flight.
Keywords: Turning away from having to prove oneself. Rising
above the commonplace. Ascension. Rebirth. Homespun truth.
Ideals that uplift and free. Shouting joy from the treetops. Boosts in
self-esteem. Strength. Transformation. Plans taking shape. Power
and might. Conveying images of strength and fidelity. Declaring
visions and dreams. Totems. Strong displays of independence and
freedom. Announcements. High flight.
The Caution: Forcefully displaying private beliefs. Swallowing
advertising or propaganda. Believing the party line. Blowing your
own horn. Bragging. Sudden mood swings. Arrogance. Throwing
one’s weight around. Threatening others with loud displays of
might. Bullying. Talking over the top of others. Not listening
because of righteousness.
Aquarius 9
It is not good enough for things
to be planned,they still have
to be done;for the intention to
become a reality,energy has to
be launched into operation.
PirVilayat Khan
Let us raise a standard to which
the wise and honest can repair;
the rest is in the hands of God.
GeorgeWashington
You can put wings on a pig,but
you don’t make it an eagle.
Bill Clinton
Aim for the highest.
Andrew Carnegie
If I have freedom in my love,
And in my soul am free,Angels
alone that soar above,Enjoy
such liberty.
Richard Lovelace
The chasm between the
principles upon which this
Government was founded,in
which it still professes to believe,
and those which are daily
practiced under the protection
of the flag,yawn wide and deep.
Mary ChurchTerrell
This is an important
announcement.This is flight
121 to Los Angeles.If your travel
plans today do not include
Los Angeles,now would be
a perfect time to disembark.
Douglas Adams

<<<PAGE 333>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
310
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN WHO HAD FOR A TIME
BECOME THE EMBODIMENT OF AN
IDEAL IS MADE TO REALIZE THAT AS
A PERSON HE IS NOT THIS IDEAL
Commentary:‘AManWhoHadForaTimeBecometheEmbodiment
of an Ideal is Made to Realize That as a Person He is Not This Ideal’
shows the dawning of the understanding that one cannot always live
up to one’s own expectations, let alone the expectations of others.
The ‘Person’ involved in this issue may have been put on a pedestal,
looked up to in some way and thought very highly of. On the other
hand, he may have been putting on a false show to get some kind of
response from others. Now there’s been a ‘Realization’ – something
hashappenedandthere’sanadjustmentofbeliefs,feelings,responses
and expectations.
Oracle: You may be looking at yourself, or someone else, and
discovering that things are not as ‘Ideal’ as you perhaps thought.
The important thing to ‘Realize’, or remember, is that true depth
of character and self-worth does not always equate with having the
popular support of others. Also, we often project what we want to
see onto both ourselves and others and this may not have much to do
with the actual core of the real person. Having said that, there can be
immensedisappointmentanddisillusionmentwhensomeonedoesn’t
live up to their promises or responsibilities. It’s important not to get
disheartened by the ‘Realization’ that someone isn’t as perfect as was
once thought; instead, consider ways to restore faith. Staying true to
one’s own ‘Ideals’ is the aim here. On a personal level, there can be
periodsoffeelingworthless,unlovedandfallingintodepressionwith
feelings of failure and despair. However, there are often wonderful
opportunities for "self disclosure” here. Read the signs and learn
more about yourself as well as others. This Symbol can also show
opportunities that are merely fleeting, like being idolized or famous
for “five minutes” and then falling from grace.
Keywords: Staying true to oneself. Ideas that look great for a time,
but lose their gloss. Lost opportunities. Waking up just in time.
Depression.Self-esteemissues.Projectionsofpersonality.Notclearly
seeingpeople.Realizingthatpeoplehavechanged.Falseexpectations.
Falling off the pedestal. Finding one's core identity.
The Caution: Clinging to false feelings of fame. Not accepting
that things have moved on or changed. Disillusionment and
disappointment. Losing one’s faith. Religious questions and doubts.
Aiming too high. Reversals of fortune. Idols and idolizing. Self pity.
Giving up. Being slammed by others.
Aquarius 10
In recognizing the humanity
of our fellow beings,we pay
ourselves the highest tribute.
Thurgood Marshall
Better be ill spoken of by one
before all than by all before one.
Scottish Proverb
A free society is a place where
it’s safe to be unpopular.
Adlai Stevenson
Those whom the gods
would destroy they first call
“promising.”
Jan Carew
Glory is fleeting,but obscurity is
forever.
Napoleon Bonaparte
Shun praise.Praise leads to
self-delusion.Thy body is not
Self,thy SELF is in itself without
a body,and either praise or
blame affects it not.
H.P.Blavatsky
It took me a long time not to
judge myself through someone
else’s eyes.
Sally Field
An actor’s popularity is
fleeting.His success has the life
expectancy of a small boy who
is about to look into a gas tank
with a lighted match.
Fred Allen

<<<PAGE 334>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
311
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
DURING A SILENT HOUR,A MAN
RECEIVES A NEW INSPIRATION
WHICH MAY CHANGE HIS LIFE
Commentary: ‘During a Silent Hour, a Man Receives a New
Inspiration’ shows someone taking some time out to contemplate,
meditate, or just be by themselves. He ‘Receives a New Inspiration’:
he has a thought, an idea or an ‘Inspiration’ that is the answer to
a dilemma or provides clues of how to proceed with something.
This ‘New Inspiration May Change His Life'—he’s had some deep
understanding and it is likely to turn his life around.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the benefits of “getting away from it
all” in order to reassess your life and goals. This ‘Silent Hour’ could
be a short minute, a few hours, or a period of days, etc. What the
Symbol shows is that a ‘New Inspiration’ will be 'Received'. You may
have found that despite racking your brains there’s been no rational
guidance available. It’s important to realize that a lot of internal as
well as external noise needs to be quieted. The rational mind can
be noisy and tends to interfere with the flow of the imagination
or intuition. You need to slow down and open up to the messages
of your inner ‘Inspiration’. By reducing the external noise, clutter
and distraction, your mind can focus on what is essential, rather
than what may just be convenient. This Symbol shows that there
is an answer coming, which will probably change many things,
or at least change what most needs to be changed. This can also
imply the need for a shift of some kind, and this may have been
forgotten, or neglected, because of preoccupations with social
matters, or being too busy. Listen for clues: It may not be external
voices that bring this ‘New Inspiration’ but the voices within. If
there is difficulty blocking out the hustle and bustle of everyday
life, meditation or delving into your dreams or fantasies may lead
to the solution.
Keywords: Welling creative power. Inspiration = breathing in
the spirit. Coming to terms with one’s reality. Visionary people
and events. Being reborn. Spiritual awakenings. Meditation and
reflective thought. Intuitive awareness rising up into conscious
awareness. Spending time alone, thinking. Contemplation.
Reversals. Flashes of insight.
TheCaution: Exclusion of others. Obsession with one’s objectives.
Being a hermit. Hearing voices. Feeling trapped. Shooting off in
all directions. Dropping things without resolution. Cutting off
from life. Constantly changing directions. Regretting the past.
Not moving on.
Aquarius 11
It is in your moments of decision
that your destiny is shaped.
Anthony Robbins
Theyareneveralonewhoare
accompaniedbynoblethoughts.
Philip Sidney
Silence at the proper season is
wisdom,and better than any
speech.
Plutarch
Those who dream by day are
cognizant of many things
which escape those who dream
only by night.
Edgar Allen Poe
Imagination is the outreaching
of mind … the bombardment
of the conscious mind with
ideas,impulses,images
and every sort of psychic
phenomena welling up from
the preconscious.It is the
capacity to“dream dreams and
see visions …”
Rollo May
God is the friend of silence.See
how nature—trees,flowers,
grass-grows in silence;see the
stars,the moon and the sun,
how they move in silence…We
need silence to be able to touch
souls.
MotherTeresa
The universe is full of magical
things patiently waiting for our
wits to grow sharper.
Eden Phillpots

<<<PAGE 335>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
312
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
PEOPLE ON A VAST STAIRCASE,
GRADUATED UPWARDS
Commentary: ‘People On a Vast Staircase, Graduated Upwards’
is a Symbol of people operating or standing at different levels. As
they are ‘Graduated Upwards’ some are higher up whilst some
are lower down the ladder, or ‘Staircase’. The ‘People’ pictured
here may be looking up at those above, peering down at those
below, or just observing their place in the scheme of things. The
‘Staircase’ in the movie “Titanic” is a good example of how this
Symbol can operate, with those with wealth and power going off
in one direction and those in a lesser position going in another.
Oracle: You may be seeking to find your place in the scheme
of things. Striving for the top is wonderful, and achieving your
own successes is admirable, and the climb up will probably bring
the rewards you need. Be careful not to concern yourself with
thoughts of “who’s in front” or “who’s behind”. It’s probably of no
real consequence. Concentrating on your own position and where
you want to go will bring happiness and success. No matter what
your status, and regardless of what others are doing, be patient
and trust that you and yours are heading in the right direction.
This Symbol doesn’t always involve outright competition,
although it can. It can show the consequence of the layers of
the class system, which can be rewarding to some, but alienating
to others. Be careful of the “rungs” you are climbing, one that
isn’t secure can have you in a risky or compromising situation.
Being at the bottom, or even at the top can lead to problems. It’s
not useful to consider your present position unimportant. Being
expendable is not a good thing. Accept your position as it is now
and work towards and look forward to a promotion to both your
place and the wisdom that is yet to come.
Keywords: Observing life from different levels. Social gradations
and graduations. Working class to aristocracy. Orders from above,
in any sense of the meaning. Waiting for one’s turn at the top.
Politics. Big business. Multilevel marketing. Gradual upward
climbs. Competitiveness. Stairs and ladders. Taking life step by
step. Admiring success. Promotions. Corporate ladders.
The Caution: Nervous worry about social position. Snobbery
because of monetary, intellectual or social status. Can imply class,
creed or racial prejudice. Climbing the ladder of success without
care for those who are supplanted. Unsafe heights. Falling from
grace. Denigrating or undermining others. Snakes and ladders.
Rarefied atmospheres.
Aquarius 12
Stairs are climbed step by step.
Kurdish Proverb
You cannot push anyone up
the ladder unless he is willing to
climb himself.
Andrew Carnegie
One man’s ceiling is another
man’s floor.
David Levine
Never look down on anybody
unless you’re helping him up.
The Rev.Jesse Jackson
Don’t bother just to be better
than your contemporaries or
predecessors.Try to be better
than yourself.
William Faulkner
The rung of a ladder was never
meant to rest upon,but only to
hold a man’s foot long enough
to enable him to put the other
somewhat higher.
Thomas Henry Huxley
The higher one climbs on
the spiritual ladder,the more
they will grant others their
own freedom,and give less
interference to another’s state
of consciousness.
PaulTwitchell
Always be nice to people on the
way up;because you'll meet the
same people on the way down.
Wilson Mizner

<<<PAGE 336>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
313
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BAROMETER
Commentary: ‘A Barometer’ is shown. The word ‘Barometer’
comes from the Greek “baros”, meaning weight. It measures
atmospheric pressure by responding to fluctuations. In weather
forecasting, the ‘Barometer’ is used to signify and help the analysis
of weather producing pressure systems. A storm is generally
anticipated when the ‘Barometer’ is falling rapidly; when the
‘Barometer’ is rising, fair weather may usually be expected.
Oracle: You may feel the need to plan for future action and to
know what to expect or at least anticipate. This can picture a
situation where there’s the task of being a “translator” of what’s
going on in the environment. You will find in your own sensitivity
to the environment, and to the people around you, the very
instrument that can sense how they’re feeling or what’s coming
up next. Watching, waiting and feeling out the atmosphere before
taking any action will lead to the best answer. Observing other’s
reactions will provide clues, as well. Once you know which way
to move with this situation, you’ll be able to go straight for the
objective, so take a little time to sniff things out. Perhaps someone
else is doing this, watching and waiting. It may be that they also
don’t want to commit to anything without the benefit of further
information. Opening yourself up to the signals around you may
lead to increased psychic ability with people turning to you for
advice or instruction. It can indicate a need to live day by day and
not make any major decisions until things become clear. Checking
the “weather” and how the prevailing conditions “feel” will help
you to proceed with your plans or dreams. Whether these things
are emotionally, physically or mentally important, you’ll know
in good time. If something doesn’t feel quite right, and a change
in the environment seems imminent, taking precautions ahead
of time can save a lot of problems.
Keywords: Staying ahead of the weather. Feeling changes ahead
of time. Measured responses. Measurements. Perceiving subtle
changes. Insight. Indicators. Knowing when rain or storms
are coming. Stilling one’s self for answers. Talking about the
weather. Putting out one’s feelers. Anticipating shifts. Opinion
polls. Anticipating what’s going to happen. Being on guard for
inclement weather.
TheCaution: Fear of change. Constant looking to fashions or fads.
Not knowing how to react because of shifts in the atmosphere.
Watching and waiting to see how other people act, seemingly
with no will of one’s own. Being changeable. Having no anchor.
Constant looking. Not being able to read the environment
accurately.
Aquarius 13
BAROMETER,n.Aningenious
instrumentwhichindicateswhat
kindofweatherwearehaving.
Ambrose Bierce
Sudden resolutions,like the
sudden rise of mercury in a
barometer,indicate little else
than the variability of the
weather.
David Hare
It doesn’t matter what
temperature the room is;it’s
always room temperature.
StephenWright
The man of character,sensitive
to the meaning of what he
is doing,will know how to
discover the ethical paths in the
maze of possible behavior.
EarlWarren
Some are weather-wise,some
are otherwise.
Benjamin Franklin
Observe due measure,for right
timing is in all things the most
important factor.
Hesiod
Shame is that intrinsic meter of
our own heart to tell us that we
have failed to follow our own
moral compass.
LaDawnna Burnett
Those who speak most of
progress measure it by quantity
and not by quality.
George Santaya

<<<PAGE 337>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
314
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A TRAIN ENTERING A TUNNEL
Commentary:‘ATrainEnteringaTunnel’showstheabilitytotakethe
shortestandmostdirectroutetoadestinationoroutcome.Yearsago,
we would have had to go the long way around a mountain, but now
wecanusemanypathways,methodsand“shortcuts”togetwherewe
wanttogoquicklyandexpediently.Often,though,goingintoa‘Train
Tunnel’canbeaweirdexperience;thesunlightsuddenlydisappears,
and it can feel as though we are hurtling through the earth to some
unknown destination. This can be exciting, but also often rather
disconcerting as the ‘Train’ speeds towards its destination or goal.
Oracle: You may feel the need to cut through any obstacles you
encounter and to go straight ahead, regardless of any unseen
hazards on your way. It may be necessary to examine whether you
are operating at cross-purposes with someone. There may be a need
to check the ‘Trains’ signals, to make sure that there’s not a collision
with people, or complications, coming the other way. This can be
particularly true if this feels like a “one-track” journey. Perhaps the
situation feels like it’s never going to end, as though you’re stuck in
a ‘Tunnel’, but it’s certain that it will. You are likely to have a great
deal of drive and it’s probable that others are with you, or people
may be depending on you, so plough on through. However, this
can be a lonely journey that you’re on. It may feel like you’re going
through a dark ‘Tunnel’ all by yourself, and there can be a sense of
isolation. Whatever the situation, there’s a need to cut to the heart
of the problem, without stopping to consider every single detail.
Quickly adjusting, changing or making up your mind about some
issue or problem can lead to swift conclusions and solutions. Getting
stuck in the details of the situation will probably just add to a much
longer outcome than is needed. You, or someone close to you, may
need to just go for it. Look to ensure that you’re not missing out on
the joy in the journey though. Perhaps you’d really rather go the long
way than through the ‘Tunnel’?
Keywords: Deep penetration. Cutting through extraneous or
stifling detail. Persistence. Shortcuts to a desired end. Heart
bypasses—physical, emotional, spiritual, etc. Cutting to the chase.
Going for the objective regardless of side issues. Working at getting
something finished or done. Near-death experiences. The need for
trackmaintenance.Droppingalldistractingconsiderations.Fallopian
tubes. Hurried sex.
The Caution: Being overcautious. Taking the long way around.
Shortcuts that inhibit deep penetration. Cutting through the crap.
Tunnel vision. Cutting people off. Not listening to others. Having a
one-track mind that doesn’t allow for detours or deviations. Severe
changes in pressure. Railroading and bulldozing.
Aquarius 14
The only way round is through.
Robert Frost
No steam or gas ever drives
anything until it is confined.No
Niagara is ever turned into light
and power until it is tunneled.
No life ever grows until it is
focused,dedicated,disciplined.
Harry Emerson Fosdick
Due to the current economic
climate,the light at the end of
the tunnel will be turned off
until further notice.
Anon
If we see light at the end of
the tunnel it is the light of an
oncoming train.
Robert Lowell
The most common of all
antagonisms arises from a
man’s taking a seat beside you
on the train,a seat to which he
is completely entitled.
Robert Benchley
If you board the wrong train,
it is no use running along the
corridor in the other direction.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
RAILROAD,n.The chief of many
mechanical devices enabling us
to get away from where we are
to where we are no better off.
Ambrose Bierce

<<<PAGE 338>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
315
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
TWO LOVEBIRDS SITTING ON A
FENCE AND SINGING HAPPILY
Commentary: ‘Two Lovebirds Sitting on a Fence and Singing
Happily’ is an image that brings to mind togetherness, friendship,
happiness, love, and the rejoicing of relationship. The ‘Lovebirds’
may be 'Singing Happily', but as they are ‘Sitting on a Fence’ this
could be masking a reality; perhaps they are not exactly happy;
perhaps they are not so together. If, indeed, the ‘Two’ are ‘Singing
Happily’, this is cause for joy and celebration about issues relating
to love, partnership, being together and the sharing of lives.
Oracle: ‘Singing’ and making statements about love out loud
can bring happiness to those nearby and lift the spirits of all
involved. However, this Symbol can also point to dividing lines
between people, like having a ‘Fence’ of some kind between
them. Although there may be superficial feelings of contentment
and pleasure, this can be based on someone having a non-
committed, tenuous or shaky position. To go one way or another
with conviction in a relationship can invite the risk of separation,
but commitment eventually needs to be chosen or rejected. How
long can people sit on the ‘Fence’? The ‘Fence’ can represent
actual physical divisions between people, where they can see
each other, but can’t actually connect or be with each other. Is
that what’s happening? Is one ‘Lovebird Singing Happily' and
the other one wanting to escape? Divisions of hearts and minds
can lead to sorrow. See if you can look to love and happiness. It
may take time for people to relax into a relationship, especially
if they’ve learnt to distrust each other or relationships in general.
Is there a pledging of commitment to each other? This Symbol
can also indicate problems with fertility and falling pregnant. If
people are always ‘On the Fence’ how can they commit to the
lives of their offspring—whether the “offspring” is their young,
their creative ideas, or their future.
Keywords: Faith in love. Waiting for signs. Friendship and
companionship. Issues of “that’s them and this is us”. Fences,
borders and barriers. Showing love for all to see. Commitment to
relationship. Mating for life. The need for honest communications.
Singing. Speaking one's truth.
The Caution: Sitting on the fence. Complaining about
relationships. Waiting to see what the others do. Being stuck
when one would rather fly off and be free. Having a fixed position.
Not wanting to comply with the other. Neighborhood disputes.
Noises from next door. Boasting of happiness.
Aquarius 15
Do not wrong or hate your
neighbor for it is not he that
you wrong but yourself.
Native American Proverb
Throw your heart over the fence
and the rest will follow.
NormanVincent Peale
Sometimes I wonder if men and
women really suit each other.
Perhaps they should live next
door and just visit now and then.
Katherine Hepburn
There is room in the smallest
cottage for a happy loving pair.
Johann FriedrichVon Schiller
The wavering multitude is
divided into opposite factions.
Virgil
A hedge between keeps
friendship green.
Traditional Proverb
A long dispute means both
parties are wrong.
Voltaire
Good fences make good
neighbors.
E.Rogers
Some of our friends are for it.
Some of our friends are against
it.And we’re standing with our
friends.
Mike McCurry—White House
press secretary

<<<PAGE 339>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
316
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BIG BUSINESSMAN AT HIS DESK
Commentary: ‘A Big Businessman at His Desk’ reflects the need
for organization, power and leadership. As the ‘Businessman’ is
seen as being ‘Big’, he probably has much to look after; details,
finances, paperwork, possibly for a large business or group. He
can’t truly be successful if he doesn’t have control over the various
aspects of his work life. ‘His Desk’ must be in order and he needs
a healthy command of his sphere of operations.
Oracle: This Symbol implies the need to feel confident and able to
operate efficiently in the ‘Business’ world. Sometimes ‘Business’
takes up so much time in our lives that we forget to unwind and
talk and think about anything else. How often and for how long
does one have to be ‘At His Desk’? Are ‘Business’ considerations
more important than home and family or health? Someone in
this situation may be unable to get directly involved in life, but
have to stay behind and attend to details and do the organizing.
Feeling ‘Big’, confident, assured and proud of one’s achievements
can lead to expanded feelings about what one is capable of doing
and contributing. Someone may have to stand up and declare what
is and isn’t desirable, ethical or possible. Emotional reactions may
be out of place here; employing a rational manner may be what’s
needed to resolve things. Then again, emotions may not be playing
any part and maybe that’s the issue. Perhaps someone is being
rather cold and possibly cut-off in the pursuit of their objectives.
This Symbol asks: Are you organized, or do you have a huge mess
piling up in your life? Are you taking notice of necessary details?
Are you living your life the way you think is best for your future,
your relationships and physical well being? Perhaps there’s a need
for more creativity, more time for your emotional and spiritual
life. After all, allowing creative and emotional energy to flow will
most likely increase your business success.
Keywords: Issues of being happy in one’s career. Making
decisions. Management. Being in charge and in control. Calling
the shots. The head rules the heart. Delegating duties or jobs.
Economic rationalism. Sorting paperwork. Corporations. Keeping
a diary. Striking a balance between having a life and doing all
that needs to be done. Desks, telephones, computers, faxes, etc.
Details and more details.
The Caution: Taking advantage. Bossing others. Shoving people
around. Getting depressed about work. Always being “on the
job”. Talking about money and business constantly. Greediness.
Exploiting people and events for personal gain. Having difficulty
retiring. The removal of the “little people”. Not doing the
paperwork. Brushes with the law.
Aquarius 16
MondayIhaveFridayonmymind.
The Easybeats
By working faithfully eight hours
a day,you might eventually get
to be a boss and work twelve
hours a day.
Robert Frost
What the world really needs is
more love and less paperwork.
Pearl Bailey
A billion here and a billion there
and pretty soon you’re talking
big money.
Everett M.Dirksen-US politician
I hate being a grown-up.Having
to learn things I don’t want
to know really pisses me off.
Overheard,quoted by
Barbara Sher
Having more money does
not ensure happiness.People
with ten million dollars are no
happier than people with nine
million dollars.
Hobart Brown
People who work sitting down
get paid more than people who
work standing up.
Ogden Nash
Ever notice that even the busiest
people are never too busy to
tell you just how busy they are?
Anon
The hardest thing in the world
to understand is the income tax.
Albert Einstein

<<<PAGE 340>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
317
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WATCHDOG STANDING GUARD,
PROTECTING HIS MASTER AND HIS
POSSESSIONS
Commentary: ‘A Watchdog Standing Guard, Protecting His
Master and His Possessions’. The ‘Watchdog’ needs to stay alert
for possible intrusion, robbery or someone stepping over their
boundaries and into his territory. The ‘Watchdog’ can’t truly
relax as there’s the need to be constantly “on guard” in case of
trouble. If the ‘Watchdog’ lets down his 'Guard' for even a short
time, problems may occur when he’s not looking. This can end
up being a tiring responsibility, especially if he is the only one
who is taking the situation seriously.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, you may feel unsafe and sense
the need to be alert for signs of trouble. Enlisting the support of
trusted and loyal helpers may be necessary, as there are likely
to be others who also have a vested interest in everything going
smoothly or continuing to be okay. There is probably the need for
some form of reassurance, self-assurance or confidence that all
is safe in your environment. Relaxation may be an issue: Is a lack
of sleep impinging on your life? Alternatively, somebody may be
prying, or watching for someone to slip up. However, sometimes
we imagine all sorts of intrusions or threats that aren’t there in
reality. This can lead to the distrust of others, even those close
to you. Any small noise or sudden movement can set off a chain
reaction of suspicion and paranoia. However, one needs to be
able to feel that it’s possible to let down their ‘Guard’ now and
then. There can be sense of ‘Protection’ discovered from being
able to discern what’s real and what’s not.
Keywords: Guardianship. Things that stand guard and protect.
Being on the alert against invasion or other trouble. Loyalty,
possessiveness. Jealousy. The worry of loss. Alarm and security
systems. Locks. Watchdogs. Being afraid of intrusion. Survival
instincts. Bouncers and musclemen. Security guards. Constantly
checking up. Sudden responses. Having one's ear to the ground
for danger.
The Caution: Suspicion and paranoia that rob the joy of
ownership. Being unable to let down one’s guard because of
the possibility of invasion or attack. Feelings of being exposed.
Possible betrayal. Greed. Envy. Lust for power. Having others do
“the dirty work”. Stool pigeons. Spying. Stooges. Being the fall guy.
Worrying endlessly about loss. Resenting intrusion. Jealousy.
Aquarius 17
CERBERUS,n.Thewatch-dog
ofHades,whosedutyitwasto
guardtheentrance—against
whomorwhatdoesnotclearly
appear;everybody,sooneror
later,hadtogothere,andnobody
wantedtocarryofftheentrance.
Ambrose Bierce
There is no rule more invariable
than that we are paid for our
suspicions by finding what we
suspect.
Thoreau
Iloathepeoplewhokeepdogs.
Theyarecowardswhohaven’tgot
thegutstobitepeoplethemselves.
August Strindberg
There’s nothing so comfortable
as a small bankroll.A big one is
always in danger.
Wilson Mizner
Gold will be slave or master.
Horace
Why grab possessions like
thieves,or divide them like
socialists when you can ignore
them like wise men?
Natalie Clifford Barney
Liberals feel unworthy of their
possessions.Conservatives feel
they deserve everything they’ve
stolen.
Mort Sahl
Possession is nine points of the
law.
Proverb

<<<PAGE 341>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
318
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN BEING UNMASKED AT A
MASQUERADE
Commentary: ‘A Man Being Unmasked at a Masquerade’ shows
the inevitable outcome for anyone who is participating in a
‘Masquerade’. He can get away with wearing the ‘Mask’ for a
period of time, but eventually circumstances will lead him to have
to reveal himself sooner or later. This could happen voluntarily
or involuntarily. He may decide when it’s time to reveal who he
truly is, or he may be forced to lift the ‘Mask’ against his own
wishes.
Oracle: Sometimes life uncovers ‘Masks’, intrigues, cover-ups
and mysteries so that the truth may be revealed. Things may look
better or worse in their true light. What is revealed may be beyond
most people’s expectations with a very happy result. On the other
hand, there can be real disappointment as one’s true identity, and
even the way one looks, becomes unveiled. Secret motives may
have some kind of purpose, but they almost invariably become
known in time and pretending to be something or someone that
one isn’t can lead to painful realizations when the truth comes
out. Lies or cover-ups being revealed can lead to big changes in
relationships. You may find that this confronts you now. The first
concern may be for the embarrassment and difficulties that can
arise, but it’s probably too late to worry about that. With this
Symbol, the truth will be revealed and exposed sooner or later.
The question is: Are people being true to the truth themselves?
Are things being covered up? If they are, sooner than later it
will begin to come to light that things aren’t as they’ve seemed.
Is it possible in this situation to forgive and forget? If needed,
psychotherapy and other forms of healing can bring issues to
the surface so they can be faced.
Keywords: Secret motives exposed. Having to face one’s self.
Facing the truth about another. Coming to terms with judgments
about one’s true worth. Owning up to who one truly is. Being
able to see through characters and trickery. Wearing a ‘Mask’
that suits the situation. Insights into people. Dropping pretense.
Stripping away cover-ups. Aliases. Finding or revealing one's true
self. The desire for authenticity.
The Caution: Detrimentally revealing yourself too quickly or too
early. Being found out to be a fraud. Finding answers that aren’t
welcome. Layers of deception discovered. Charades, pretense
and ploys to manipulate. Lies. Assumed identities.
Aquarius 18
Alas,fortune does not change
men;it unmasks them.
StephenT.Steve
The greatest way to live with
honor in this world is to be
what we pretend to be.
Socrates
Man is least himself when he
talks in his own person.Give
him a mask,and he will tell you
the truth.
OscarWilde
Whoever is detected in a
shameful fraud is ever after not
believed even if they speak the
truth.
Phaedrus
It is only the superficial qualities
that last.Man’s deeper nature is
soon found out.
OscarWilde
People that seem so glorious
are all show;underneath they
are like everyone else.
Euripides
One may sometimes tell
a lie,but the grimace that
accompanies it tells the truth.
Friedrich Nietzsche
Who are you going to believe,
me or your own eyes?
Groucho Marx

<<<PAGE 342>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
319
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FOREST FIRE FINALLY QUENCHED
Commentary: A ‘Forest Fire Finally Quenched’ pictures a situation
where enthusiastic drive and zeal can set off an uncontrollable,
exciting and sometimes destructive chain of events. The ‘Forest
Fire’ can cause a lot of damage and burn up anything that happens
to be in its path. There has been no choice but to fight for control
and minimize the destruction to the ‘Forest’ and those things in
the path of the fire – animals, humans, houses, etc.
Oracle: In this situation ‘A Fire’ is ‘Finally Quenched’. Any efforts
to contain the damage will at last be successful, and some people
will find the challenge to have been exhilarating. Regaining
control of the environment will lead to things coming back to
normal again, but everything, or at least many things, may be
changed. Major transformations may have taken place on many
levels. It is said that a ‘Forest Fire’ is actually good for the forest
as a whole as it makes room for new growth by removing old
and dead matter. Farmers burn off their dead crops on a regular
basis to recycle the nutrients into the soil so as to nourish the new
growth. The ‘Fire’ also destroys the taller plants and trees which
crowd out the shorter ones and block the Sun from reaching
them (just as our illusions can block us from “seeing the light”
of the truth). However, much can be lost in a 'Forest Fire'; there
can be threats to life and property. You may find that you have
been caught up in a situation, fighting for emotional or physical
control. Something that was raging in its intensity has ‘Finally’
been extinguished or satisfied. This may have left you somewhat
exhausted, but the exhilaration that can come from surviving
such a struggle can leave you transformed and jubilant.
Keywords: Exuberant feelings that come after struggles. Coming
out of an experience with a new sense of commitment or a new
understanding of consequences. Getting a bee in your bonnet.
Spot fires. Jubilation and release after hard labor. Fighting for
control. Sparks getting out of control. Events taking off in all
directions. Sexual energy and the containment of it. Ideas that
get whipped up and take off at high speed. The ferocity of nature.
The calm after the storm. Smouldering passions. Smoke. One-
eyed focus.
The Caution: Giving up too soon and losing it all. Self-defeating
delight in drama. Looking back on a situation that got out of
control and produced a lot of rubble. Destructive passions. Losing
one’s spark. Running out of fuel. Feeling burnt out. Exhaustion
and despair at what's lost.
Aquarius 19
What is to give light must
endure burning.
Viktor Frankl
A little fire is quickly trodden
out,which being suffered,rivers
cannot quench.
William Shakespeare
It is with our passions as it is
with fire and water;they are
good servants,but bad masters.
Sir Roger L'Estrange
Get excited and enthusiastic
about you own dream.This
excitement is like a forest
fire—you can smell it,taste it,
and see it from a mile away.
DenisWaitley
Do not quench your inspiration
and your imagination;do not
become the slave of your model.
VincentVan Gogh
Genius is the power of lighting
one’s own fire.
John Foster
Contentment consisteth not in
adding more fuel,but in taking
away some fire.
Thomas Fuller
I’ve seen public opinion shift like
the wind and put out the very
fire it lighted.
Rachel Field

<<<PAGE 343>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
320
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LARGE WHITE DOVE BEARING A
MESSAGE
Commentary: ‘A Large White Dove Bearing a Message’ shows
messages of peace and love. The ‘Dove’ is a symbol of innocence,
gentleness and affection; also, in art and in the Scriptures, it is the
typicalsymboloftheHolyGhost.WhenJesuswasbaptized,theHoly
Ghost descended in the shape of a ‘Dove’. It also symbolizes the soul
and as such is sometimes represented coming out of the mouths
of saints at death. ‘Doves’ are a symbol of inspiration and divine
guidance. A caged ‘Dove’ signifies the human soul imprisoned in
the flesh and held captive during the period of mortal life. They can
represent peace and in this Symbol the ‘Large White Dove is Bearing
a Message’. The ‘Dove’ brought to Noah a bough of an olive-tree as
a sign that the deluge of wrath that was unleashed by the flood was
over. Further ‘Doves’ are said to be able to perform miracles with
their‘Messages’.Mahomet’smiraclefromtheKoranspeaksofawhite
‘Dove’ whispering a ‘Message’ from God into Mahomet’s ear.
Oracle: You may need to solve your situation by relying on peaceful
messages that come from either outside or inside of yourself. A
‘Message’ is very likely to be on its way, one that you may have
beenwaitingtohearforsometime.This‘Message’canreassureyour
spiritual center and will probably be offered with gentleness and
withoutmalice.Further,someonecouldsayorrevealsomethingthat
changes the whole situation, turning it around. However, it could be
that the ‘Message’ is not an easy one for someone to deliver. It may
cause you to have to face something you’d rather not. Whatever, the
‘Large White Dove’ can be quietly reassuring that everything will
be okay in the end. Healing rifts between people with promises
of improvements, faith and trust will uplift the spirit. Miracles are
known to happen, so it’s best to hold to positive outcomes. After
all, Noah had to do that on his Ark. Listen intently for ‘Messages’ as
they will be around you, in one way or another.
Keywords:Beingseenasasaviororonewhoneedssaving.Blessings
delivered—all will be well. Celebration. Somebody who brings
blessed relief. Issues of hope and salvation. The Covenant. News.
Announcements. Peace movements. The Rainbow Warrior. Utopian
idealism. Olive branches.
The Caution: Staying with the assumption that things will never
improve. Refusing solace. Shooting the messenger. Not trusting
the good things in life. Not being content with any message that’s
relayed. Insincere messages caused by the pain of not facing the
real truth.
Aquarius 20
Our soul is escaped as a bird
from the snare of the hunters,
the snare is broken and we are
delivered.
Catholic Encyclopedia
Hold fast to dreams,For if
dreams die,Life is a broken-
winged birdThat cannot fly.
Langston Hughes
Something was dead in each
of us,and what was dead was
Hope.
OscarWilde
We must accept finite
disappointment,but never lose
infinite hope.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Lift me like an olive branch,be
my homeward dove.
Leonard Cohen
A secret is like a dove,when it
leaves my hand it takes wing.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
Censure pardons the ravens but
rebukes the doves.
Latin Proverb
I got the message.All of us get
the message,sooner or later.If
you get it before it’s too late or
before you’re too old,you’ll pull
through all right.
Nat King Cole

<<<PAGE 344>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
321
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN DISAPPOINTED AND
DISILLUSIONED,COURAGEOUSLY
FACING A SEEMINGLY EMPTY LIFE
Commentary: ‘A Woman Disappointed and Disillusioned’ is an
image of apparent sadness and loss. As she’s ‘Courageously Facing
a Seemingly Empty Life’, she’s putting on a brave face, even though
it may feel to her that she doesn’t have much of a future. This could
really be just a matter of perception and expectations. Perhaps there
are some, or indeed many, things that she could be grateful for, but
some areas of her life are unfulfilled and not working. Perhaps there
are no children, no relationship or something has been lost.
Oracle: There can be feelings of wasted energy, trying to achieve
something against the odds, while creating only failure. However, it
isalwaysimportanttolookon‘Disappointment’andlossasateacher.
The feeling, or belief, that one will never have the life they want
can lead to exactly that outcome. Trying to be objective can help, as
things could improve far beyond your expectations or dreams in the
future. As they say, while there is life there is hope and we always
have something to strive for and achieve, if only we can have faith
in it. ‘Courage’ is a key to recognizing the fullness and beauty of life,
regardless of how others see it. The biggest barrier to overcome is
thebitternessandbarriersthatcanarise.Theremaybesomeoneelse
whoreallyneedsyoursupport.Reconnectwithwhatisavailableand
possible in your situation. Although it requires courage and faith to
get back on track, we always return to life with greater wisdom and
understanding. Realizing one’s limitations, but doing so with a sense
of purpose and hope, will help ease matters. Try turning doom and
gloom into faith, inspiration and thanks for what IS possible and IS
available, and watch how things improve.
Keywords: Breaking through illusions. Facing stark reality with
hope. Loneliness and depression overcome. Positive outlooks.
Counting one’s blessings. Looking towards the future. Having to
battle through relationship losses while maintaining a sense of self
and purpose. Turning points reached. Having a belief in miracles.
Choosing joy.
TheCaution: Wallowing in failure. Not seeing the joy and beauty of
one’s life. Accepting defeat. Feeling like all is lost. Bitterness. Walling
one’s self off from others. Not trusting people. Finding nothing to be
happy about. Feeling deserted and alone. Not letting go of the past.
Injuries. Infertility. Incurable “dis-eases”. Unrequited love. The loss
of the partner. Staring into space. Being a sad, old person.
Aquarius 21
Life is what we make it,and the
world is what we make it.The
eyes of the cheerful and of the
melancholy man are fixed upon
the same creation;but very
different are the aspects which
it bears to them.
Albert Pike
Just think how happy you
would be if you lost everything
you have right now,and then
got it back again.
Frances Rodman
Remember that too many
people who faithfully follow
the prescription to work hard,
sacrifice,achieve,accomplish,
create and get ahead either
“crack up”in the process or find
an emotional vacuum at the
end of it all.
Arnold Lazarus
Some people are sympathetic;
others are just pathetic.
PeterWasthol
Doubt is the vestibule through
which all must pass before they
can enter into the temple of
wisdom.
Colton
We consume our tomorrows
fretting about our yesterdays.
Persius
Even when I’m sick and
depressed,I love life.
Arthur Rubenstein

<<<PAGE 345>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
322
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A RUG PLACED ON THE FLOOR FOR
CHILDREN TO PLAY ON
Commentary: ‘A Rug Placed On The Floor For Children To Play
On’ is an image of cushioning, comfort, safety, and fun places
for activity and play. The ‘Rug’ has been ‘Placed On The Floor’
because it is safe for ‘The Children’ to ‘Play’ there, they can enjoy
themselves and each other. People need times of ‘Play’, at any
age. Taking care of the “inner child”, one’s own or another’s, can
lead to a new sense of security and comfort.
Oracle: It’s human nature to want to feel safe, loved and
comfortable in our lives. You may feel as though you are struggling
as you seek to grow and develop, but even if you are not aware
of it, there are cushions, safeguards and protection all around.
Higher forces may be looking after you in your search for safety
and security. The ‘Rug’ can picture a space where you can be
creative, play and relate with others. However, the ‘Rug’ can also
be like a border or boundary that restricts activity. The ‘Rug’ can
be put in place by those who believe they are acting in others’
best interests, or through issues of control. When someone
wanders off the ‘Rug’ whose decision is it to have them return
to the same place? If you are one of the ‘Children’, having fun
and being carefree, then the ‘Rug’ is quite probably a good thing.
This can be like a safety net for your activities. If you are merely
being treated like a ‘Child’, the ‘Rug’ can be a form of control,
or others letting you know how much “space” you can take up.
There may be a need to look after ‘Children’ or those younger
than you, to provide somewhere safe for them to live and grow
– even if it proves to be difficult. If we allow a sense of security
and love into our lives we can lift our fun and enjoyment and put
up with any difficulties more easily.
Keywords: Comfort and care provided. The caring and longing
for children. Having a place of belonging. A sense of security.
Rugs, carpets, cribs and cots. Defining areas of possible activity.
Being aware of the needs of the young. Adoption. Sleeping on the
floor or the sofa. Fun, joy, toys. Playing with others. Nurseries.
Day care. Cribs. Play pens.
The Caution: Being overprotected. Not growing up. Insulation
from reality. Self-indulgence. Limits of activity. Having the rug
pulled. Expecting to be looked after vs. self-reliance. Assuming
the young and inexperienced can look after themselves. Lines
that shouldn’t be crossed. Territorial attitudes. Always having to
watch the young ones. Inability to relax. Infertility.
Aquarius 22
Here Skugg,Lies snug,As a bug,
In a rug.
Benjamin Franklin
If you let everyone walk over you,
you become a carpet.
Bulgarian Proverb
My husband and I are either
going to buy a dog or have a
child.We can’t decide whether to
ruin our carpet or ruin our lives.
Rita Rudner
It’s easier to put on slippers than
to carpet the whole world.
Al Franken
BOUNDARY,n.In political
geography,an imaginary line
between two nations,separating
the imaginary rights of one from
the imaginary rights of the other.
Ambrose Bierce
There is a boundary to men’s
passions when they act from
feelings;but none when they
are under the influence of
imagination.
Edmund Burke
Life is like a blanket too short.
You pull it up and your toes
rebel,you yank it down and
shivers meander about your
shoulder;but cheerful folks
manage to draw their knees up
and pass a very comfortable
night.
Marion Howard

<<<PAGE 346>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
323
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BIG TRAINED BEAR SITTING
DOWN AND WAVING ALL ITS PAWS
Commentary: ‘A Big Trained Bear Sitting Down and Waving all
its Paws’ paints a picture of a performing animal, and a big one
at that, going through its tricks. ‘Bears’ are easily ‘Trained’, taught
and sometimes forced into performing many actions that are alien
to their natural behaviors and habits. By having ‘All Its Paws’ off
the ground, the ‘Bear’ has symbolically given up the ability to be
able to run away or fight. It may be that it is receptive to friendly
or playful interaction. The ‘Bear’ is revealing its soft underbelly,
which can also be a sign of feeling safe and unthreatened, at least
for the moment. The ‘Bear’ may watch for cues from its trainer
or it may be able to perform the tricks all by itself.
Oracle: Perhaps there are things you don’t want to do, but it
seems your duty to do, act out or perform. There is a need to
develop responses above and beyond the normal expected level.
Perhaps you are indeed excelling in your level of performance,
only you can really tell, although others may also judge this. Look
to your situation and see if you are compromising yourself or
merely acting out conditioned responses for the sake of others.
Is someone waving their arms around when they should just
get on with the job at hand? Having to play out an act for the
sake of social protocol against one’s natural instincts may lead
to compromises that lower your self-esteem. Is someone acting
a certain way and claiming they have no choice but to act that
way? This image can also reflect a feeling of safety, or having no
sense of threat, which allows for playful antics or experimentation
with unusual behaviors.
Keywords: Developing skills. Making excuses. Performing rote
responses. Expecting others to perform. Entertaining people.
Being theatrical. Stomach rubs. Big, tall, brute energies. Sitting
down or standing up. Fur and fuzzy hair. Playing instruments.
Dancing. Performances. Arm waving. Animal training. Bears.
Training. Learning by example. Fun vs. drudge.
The Caution: Being unable to recover one’s feet. Instinctive
and creative performances for the crowd. Fatuous need to be
the center of attention. Defying authority. Vulnerable. Working
against normal instincts or desires. Flapping one’s arms. Sitting
things out. Making a big noise, but doing nothing. Being cranky,
ill tempered. Crazy behavior. Not having a mind of one’s own.
Giving up control of one’s destiny. Mindless and brainless. Drugs
and dope. Loss of spontaneity.
Aquarius 23
If animals had reason,they
would act just as ridiculous as
we men folks do.
Josh Billings
If an animal does something,
we call it instinct;if we do the
same thing for the same reason,
we call it intelligence.
Will Cuppy
Every animal knows more than
you do.
American Proverb
Our expression and our words
never coincide,which is why the
animals don’t understand us.
Malcolm De Chazal
If animals play,this is because
play is useful in the struggle for
survival;because play practices
and so perfects the skills needed
in adult life.
Susanna Miller
It’s all to do with the training:
You can do a lot if you’re
properly trained.
Queen Elizabeth II
You can’t teach an old dog new
tricks.
Traditional Proverb
Everything pays for growing
tame.
Maxine Kumin

<<<PAGE 347>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
324
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAN TURNING HIS BACK ON HIS
PASSIONS TEACHES DEEP WISDOM
FROM HIS EXPERIENCE
Commentary: ‘A Man Turning His Back on His Passions Teaches
Deep Wisdom From His Experience’ shows someone turning
away from something that’s been important in the past, but has
now lost its value or relevance. The ‘Man’ has had to ‘Turn His
Back On His Passions’ – he has most likely had valuable lessons
in the letting go of desire. This can show a ‘Turning’ away from
many things; a lover, a job, a belief, some of the very things he’s
wanted or worked hard for. Perhaps he sees there is now a more
important job or mission to be pursued. As he ‘Teaches Deep
Wisdom From His Experience’, he has some knowledge or insight
to transmit, ‘Teach’ or pass on to others.
Oracle: Going through difficult circumstances and coming out
with new realizations and codes for life is implied by this Symbol.
By controlling your ‘Passions’, and making conscious and wise
decisions about your life, you can find an objective position that
allows you to understand what’s happening. You may feel that you
can no longer survive the roller-coaster ride of your emotions.
You can benefit others by ‘Teaching’ the new ‘Wisdom’ and
the understanding that comes after having gone through some
hard lessons. The question is: Can you sublimate your thoughts,
desires and ‘Passions’? You may be in the process of going after
more tangible, real or worthwhile spiritual or material concerns.
Living life true to your path and giving up things that can lead
you astray, will allow more and more ‘Deep Wisdom’ to come
through. ‘Teaching’ or setting a good example for others can
bring its own rewards. These ‘Teachings’ will develop out of a
deep resonance that has come from the trials of ‘Experience’. It
can feel like a case of “been there, done that”.
Keywords: Conquering one’s base nature. Changing through
maturing realizations. Learning lessons the hard way. Realizing
it’s time to let go of things that once mattered. Being an example
so others may learn. Reforming one’s ways. Dignity. Guidance.
Turning around. Dropping the lower ego or society. Leading a
monastic life. Showing what you've learnt.
The Caution: Giving up on emotional growth. Being dissatisfied
with life. Being forced to perform for another’s benefit. Sticking
to things that are no longer worthwhile. Stubborn refusal to move
forward. Misguiding others. Severe reactions.
Aquarius 24
Man is a creation of desire,not
a creation of need.
Gaston Bachelard
Men at forty Learn to close
softlyThe doors to rooms they
will not be Coming back to.
Donald Justice
It is with our passions as it is
with fire and water;they are
good servants,but bad masters.
Sir Roger L’Estrange
It is in vain to hope to please all
alike.Let a man stand with his
face in what direction he will,he
must necessarily turn his back
on one half of the world.
George Dennison Prentice
The heart is wiser than the
intellect.
Josiah Holland
Been there,done that,got the
t-shirt.
Anon
To understand the world one
must not be worrying about
one’s self.
Albert Einstein
Life must be lived and curiosity
kept alive.One must never,for
whatever reason,turn his back
on life.
Eleanor Roosevelt
Man is only truly great when
he acts from his passions.
Benjamin Disraeli

<<<PAGE 348>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
325
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BUTTERFLY WITH THE RIGHT WING
MORE PERFECTLY FORMED
Commentary: ‘A Butterfly With the Right Wing More Perfectly
Formed’ shows a situation of imbalance, lopsidedness and
sometimes physical distortions. The ‘Butterfly’ may have difficulty
flying and therefore its very life is compromised because of this
“handicap”. However, perhaps this ‘Right Wing More Perfectly
Formed’ is only a problem in how things look and not how they
perform. It could be that the ‘Butterfly’ has learnt how to cope
with this imbalance and can still live its life unhindered by the
defect.
Oracle: In your situation, you may find that you are applying your
rational logical mind out of balance to your intuition and creative
wisdom. It is often harder to understand your intuitive messages,
but reliance on logic can limit your possibilities. On the other
hand, it could be that life is swamped with a lack of rational
thought and responses, relying more heavily on the emotional,
creative and spiritual. This would have to be accessed by the
individual that has this situation or problem in their life. This
Symbol can show problems or issues to do with language or the
ability to verbally express feelings. It can also show someone
or a situation where the emotional aspects get the upper hand
before the rational mind really understands or “gets it”. With this
Symbol around, it may be necessary to not only learn to trust
your intuitive feelings, but also to be careful not to overreact
emotionally and take the extra effort to bring your thoughts and
rational awareness up to speed. It can show emotional, mental or
physical handicaps that prevent one from doing what one truly
wants, or imbalances or mutations on the spiritual level. The main
issue here is about balance. Balance can still be achieved, but only
if there is a genuine acceptance of the problems inherent.
Keywords: Rising above life’s distortions. A need to bring some
type of balance to situations. Injuries or problems with hands or
arms. One side being more ‘Perfect’ than the other. The ‘Right’
being better than the left. Mutations. Handicaps. Challenges.
Disabilities. Impediments.
The Caution: Imbalances and physical distortions. Asymmetry.
An imbalance of functions leading to involuntary flapping around.
Distortions of reactions or of the truth. Lopsidedness. Hindrances.
Being at a disadvantage. Feeling incapacitated.
Aquarius 25
The bird that would soar above
the plain of tradition and
prejudice must have strong
wings.
Kate Chopin
You cannot fly with wings made
of butter.
Netherlands Antillean Proverb
A bird never flew on one wing.
Proverb
Is he alone who has courage on
his right hand and faith on his
left hand?
Charles A.Lindbergh
Whatever the right hand
findeth to do,the left hand
carries a watch on its wrist to
show how long it takes to do it.
RalphW.Sockman
I’d give my right arm to be
ambidextrous.
Yogi Berra
Let us take things as we find
them:let us not attempt to
distort them into what they
are not.We cannot make facts.
All our wishing cannot change
them.We must use them.
John Henry Cardinal Newman
Only in quiet waters do things
mirror themselves undistorted.
Only in a quiet mind is adequate
perception of the world.
Hans Margolius

<<<PAGE 349>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
326
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GARAGE MAN TESTING A CAR’S
BATTERY WITH A HYDROMETER
Commentary: ‘A Garage Man Testing a Car’s Battery With a
Hydrometer’ is an image of a mechanic ‘Testing’ the running
efficiency of a ‘Car’. He’s checking to see if any mechanical
problems or repairs are needed. Most specifically, he’s checking
the water in the ‘Car’s Battery’ in order to ensure that things will
run well. A ‘Hydrometer’ is capable of measuring many things;
alcohol, salt, sugar; anything that may be held or suspended in
water.
Oracle: This Symbol reflects the need for a mechanical approach
to the issue at hand or the calling in of a “mechanically minded”
person. There is a need to take a more objective or inventive view
that is relative to modern society. Performing necessary checks
and balances to ensure the smooth running of our lives is part of
theeverydaymaintenanceofsociety,ourappliancesandourselves.
The ‘Garage Man’ could be ‘Testing the Battery’ because there is
a problem he needs to analyze or he could be performing routine
preventative maintenance. Certainly it is better to keep an eye on
things before they go wrong. Figuring out any malfunctions so
that life can proceed in a smoother, more efficient manner will
help keep everything running smoothly. Perhaps there’s a need
for someone of authority, someone removed from your situation,
to give some assistance, repairs or feedback. An interesting aspect
of the ‘Car’s Battery’ is that the water (the emotional element)
when combined with the positive and negative elements of the
battery is a self-empowering system. In this situation, it is the
level of water or the emotional dependability of the situation
that is being measured because that is what is important. Ideally,
water that is used in a ‘Car’s Battery’ should be pure. You may
need to use some type of gauge on the health of your emotional
reactions. This Symbol can reflect the need to keep an eye on
the mechanics of the body and to be careful of dehydration or
drinking enough water.
Keywords: Testing the earthly vehicle for its roadworthiness.
Situations that have “boiled-over”, bringing all to a stop.
Breakdowns and the need for repair. Checking water levels.
Anticipating future problems. The need for good batteries. Cars
being serviced. Oil, petrol and grease. Check ups and tune-ups.
Bringing forward movement to a halt.
The Caution: Causing distress by constantly analyzing people or
situations. Bad breath or dry skin. Not taking time for repairs or
tune-ups. Running on empty.
Aquarius 26
The expectations of life depend
upon diligence;the mechanic
that would perfect his work
must first sharpen his tools.
Confucius
I do not forget that I am a
mechanic.I am proud to own
it.Neither do I forget that the
apostle Paul was a tentmaker;
Socrates was a sculptor;and
Archimedes was a mechanic.
Andrew Jackson
It is a good idea to shop around
before you settle on a doctor.
Ask about the condition of
his Mercedes.Ask about the
competence of his mechanic.
Don’t be shy.After all,you’re
paying for it.
Dave Barry
The great happiness of life,I
find,after all,to consist in the
regular discharge of some
mechanical duty.
Friedrich von Schiller
We boil at different degrees.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Humanity is moving in a circle.
The progress in mechanical
things of the past hundred
years has proceeded at the cost
of losing many other things
which perhaps were much
more important for it.
George Gurdjieff

<<<PAGE 350>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
327
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN ANCIENT POTTERY BOWL FILLED
WITH FRESH VIOLETS
Commentary: The image of ‘An Ancient Pottery Bowl Filled With
Fresh Violets’ is a reminder of the delicacy and beauty of nature.
It can picture flowers in earthenware bowls, mortar and pestles
for the preparation of herbs, and things such as flower essences
and homoeopathy. There is a feeling here of purity of motive and
content. The simpler, more natural responses to problems and
society can often bring a sense of refreshment and realignment
with what is beautiful. Honest expressions of simplicity and
respect for beauty and purity can bring joy. These can be simple
gifts given with a sense of giving from the heart.
Oracle: In the situation facing you, there may be a need to
remember to employ love, peace, beauty and simplicity. This
could be in relationship to you, with yourself, to others or to the
environment. Complications and difficulties are much more easily
solved if a fresh and simple approach is taken, rather than more
complicated, intellectual or highly charged emotional responses.
Place a ‘Bowl’ filled with fresh flowers somewhere where it can
remind you of the good things in life. Even a simple display of
flowers picked from around your neighborhood can bring joy and
settle feelings back to a more even keel and can remind you of
the true beauty of life in a very simple way. Also, picture yourself
as the open vessel, the ‘Bowl’, and allow yourself to receive the
blessings of the ‘Fresh Violets’. Soon, things will get better and
those things that you need will come to you. It can be a question
of asking yourself “what do I need, really?” Simplifying one’s life
on some level will lead to more charm and beauty.
Keywords: Returning to ancient sources. Flower and herbal
remedies. Beauty. Setting standards for society. Slowing down
the tempo to get to the purity of something. Watering the garden.
The mortar and pestle. Homoeopathy and pharmacopoeia. Stains
and dyes. Flowers. African violets. Dainty, small and lacy things.
Antiques and curios. Beautiful reminders of yesterday. Valentine’s
Day flowers, roses. Things that remind you of your grandmother.
The old supporting and nourishing the new.
The Caution: Lack of subtlety. Insensitivity. Being dried up and
withered from lack of water or emotion. Stagnant water. Being
shy and unresponsive. “Shrinking violets”. Neglecting the small
things. Being so accomodating that one's needs are neglected or
trodden on.
Aquarius 27
Big doesn’t necessarily mean
better.Sunflowers aren’t better
than violets.
Edna Ferber
Forgiveness is the fragrance the
violet sheds on the heel that
has crushed it.
MarkTwain
Flowers always make people
better,happier and more
helpful;they are sunshine,food
and medicine to the soul.
Luther Burbank
We should let our godliness
exhale like the odor of flowers.
We should live for the good
of our kind,and strive for
the salvation of the world.
Alexander Crummell
Fair flowers that are not gather’d
in their prime Rot and consume
themselves in little time.
William Shakespeare
Music,when soft voices die,
Vibrates in the memory—
Odors,when sweetViolets
sicken,Live within the sense
they quicken.
Percy Bysshe Shelley
Arranging a bowl of flowers in
the morning can give a sense
of quiet in a crowded day—like
writing a poem,or saying a
prayer.
Anne Morrow Lindbergh

<<<PAGE 351>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
328
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A TREE FELLED AND SAWED TO
ENSURE A SUPPLY OF WOOD FOR
THE WINTER
Commentary: ‘A Tree Felled and Sawed to Ensure a Supply of
Wood For the Winter’ represents the sacrifice of one thing for the
benefit of another. This Symbol pictures the shifting and changing
values we place on our environment and the tools we use. A ‘Tree’
begins as a fragile life that may need our attention, care, concern
and, in time, our gratitude. It develops into something that
provides us with beauty and shade and is a haven for many birds
and animals. In time, whether the ‘Tree’ completes its growing
cycle and dies or is cut down in its prime; it still has much to
offer. The energy that has been stored in the timber can be used
to fuel our need for warmth and comfort in hard times.
Oracle: This Symbol shows there is energy stored in everything
and that many things we may think are of no real value can be
helpful on an entirely different level. ‘The Tree Felled and Sawed’
by being used as fuel, or made into paper, is released to rejoin the
universal flow in many useful ways and forms. There are many
things that grow around us during life. Sometimes there can be
other uses that are of greater benefit than just to let things stand
like monuments or memories. You may feel a need to sacrifice
something old to find its current usefulness. There’s a need for
putting in time and effort to ensure comfort, security and hope
for the future. Gather your resources when you can, don’t wait
for the last minute when supply might not be so readily available,
or harder to put your hands on. Ensuring that things are in order
for the ‘Winter’ can allow you, and yours, to be sure of warmth
and love during more difficult times.
Keywords: Gathering resources. Being prepared for harder
times. Stocking up and stockpiling. Log cabins. Open fires. Care
and reverence for things of wood and the earth. The making of
paper. The publishing of books. Renewable resources. Xmas trees.
Axes and tools. Stores and provisions. Logging. Timber. Wood for
burning. Oil, petrol, fuel of all kinds. Woodchips. Storage.
The Caution: Hoarding supplies—not wanting anyone to get
them. Destroying the old for modern advances. Feeling cut off
at the knees. Being chopped down and stacked away somewhere.
Fearing that there won’t be enough fuel, money, etc. for harder
times. Nonrenewable resources. Wanton destruction and logging
of the forests. Waste.
Aquarius 28
Someone’s sitting in the shade
today because someone
planted a tree a long time ago.
Warren Buffett
When the oak is felled the whole
forest echoes with its fall,but
a hundred acorns are sown in
silence by an unnoticed breeze.
Thomas Carlyle
If I had 8 hours to chop down a
tree,I’d spend 6 sharpening my
axe.
Abraham Lincoln
Chop your own wood and it will
warm you twice.
Thoreau
The pioneers cleared the
forests from Jamestown to the
Mississippi with fewer tools
than are stored in the typical
modern garage.
Dwayne Laws
From a fallen tree,all make
kindling.
Spanish Proverb
Some men go through a forest
and see no firewood.
English Proverb
Write without pay until
somebody offers to pay you.
If nobody offers within three
years,sawing wood is what you
were intended for.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 352>>>
AQUARIUS
Q
329
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A BUTTERFLY EMERGING FROM A
CHRYSALIS
Commentary: ‘A Butterfly Emerging From a Chrysalis’ is
nothing less than a complete emergence into a new life and total
transformation. It’s facing a whole new beginning and an entirely
new life from what it has previously known. The ‘Butterfly’, after
it struggles to ‘Emerge’ from its ‘Chrysalis’, takes a moment to
stretch its wings and orient itself. It has shrugged off its ‘Chrysalis’
and is free to take flight when the moment is right.
Oracle: Like an awakening, you may feel that you are suddenly
able to do something that truly reflects your inner self and what
you’ve always wanted or meant to become. Things have been
developing within you that reflect who you truly want to be.
Care will need to be taken with this great effort of birth and
rebirth to ensure a smooth transition into another dimension of
life. With this brand new start you will be able to realize many
more of your talents and potentials, even the “latent” ones. What
have you been storing up and learning and what do you assess
your life’s purpose to be? There is likely to be an awakening to
a whole new field of opportunity, and this can be very exciting,
although it can be somewhat confusing and confronting. A
cautious but hopeful attitude at first will help you to ease into
it. There can be nervousness here, a feeling of having to “find
one’s feet”. It may be a good idea to take a moment to adjust to
any new developments before taking flight. There can be some
pain involved in the birth of the new, but if one has faith in the
new beginning, this is soon forgotten and life takes on a whole
new meaning. Events often happen to us to help us come out of
ourselves in a more meaningful and beautiful way. Seeing each
event as an opportunity for rebirth can lead to new depths of
life that you’ve possibly only previously imagined. Imagine the
beauty that is coming through in the birthing of your new wings
and this new life.
Keywords: Slow building of confidence. Coming out into a fuller
participation in the bigger picture. Growing up and out. Emerging
from the dark. Leaving yesterday behind. Becoming more and
more beautiful. Finding one’s feet or wings. Metamorphosis.
Huge changes in the works. Giving up struggling. The drama of
new life unfolding.
TheCaution: Failing to allow changes to be experienced. Feeling
like one will never “arrive”. Struggling to emerge ahead of time.
Feeling confined. Being tied to the past. Rushing leading to
disorientation or injury.
Aquarius 29
I do not know whether I was
then a man dreaming I was a
butterfly,or whether I am now a
butterfly dreaming I am a man.
ChuangTse
With each passage of human
growth we must shed a
protective structure [like a
hardy crustacean].We are left
exposed and vulnerable—but
also yeasty and embryonic
again,capable of stretching in
ways we hadn’t known before.
Gail Sheehy
The butterfly becomes only
when it’s entirely ready.
Chinese Proverb
There is nothing in a caterpillar
that tells you it’s going to be a
butterfly.
Sarah Margaret Fuller
It takes courage to push
yourself to places that you have
never been before… to test
your limits… to break through
barriers.And the day came
when the risk it took to remain
tight inside the bud was more
painful than the risk it took to
blossom.
Anais Nin
So long as a person is capable
of self-renewal they are a living
being.
Henri Frederic Amiel

<<<PAGE 353>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
Q
330
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
MOONLIT FIELDS,ONCE BABYLON,
ARE BLOOMING WHITE
Commentary: ‘Moonlit Fields, Once Babylon, Are Blooming White’
is an expression of purity, innocence and the fruits of the past. The
Hanging Gardens of Babylon were a magnificent structure that long
ago celebrated the rule of human culture. The Gardens were said to
be enormous structures with incredibly intricate watering systems.
They are one of the Wonders of the Ancient World. Whether real or
not, these gardens appeal to the human desire to return to the simple
andexquisitelifeoftheGardenofEden,alifeofearthlyparadise.The
myth of an original garden with perfumed trees and luscious fruits,
birds and animal life, and rivers of life-giving waters is common to
many faiths including Christianity, Judaism and Islam. Many great
advancescomeoutofthisregion,includinglanguage,astronomyand
mathematics. Long after Babylon’s fall and the man-made structures
disappeared, mere remnants of the garden that was ‘Once Babylon’
remain.
Oracle: Even though the grandeur of the past may be lost, changed
or damaged by war or time, the energy and power of a place remains.
ThisSymbolreflectsthepermanenceofthenaturalessenceofaplace,
a person, an idea or a civilization. The essence will long remain and
the seeds will sprout forth anew as these ‘Moonlit Fields Are Now
BloomingWhite’.Rewardscomefromnature’sbountyforallthework
that’sbeendoneevenamongstthedevastationandruinthathasbeen
endured. No matter what is thrown at something, the resilience and
beautyofitsspiritwillcontinuetopushthroughtheodds.Theremay
be a feeling that you are in the right place at the right time. All in all,
yourbestqualitiesoryourtalentswillberecognizedandappreciated.
Whenyouarefollowingatruepath,youareabletorelyonthesupport
of the universe in its flow. This is the degree of the beginning of the
Age of Aquarius. As the energy of the Age of Pisces wanes, the Age of
Aquarius sprouts forth like a “flower” from the ruins of the old.
Keywords: Rewards coming through from past generations. The
feeling of ancestors surrounding one’s present deeds. Alchemy.
Loss of ancient civilizations. Reverence for things from the past. The
Middle East and all things middle-eastern. Belly-dancing. Rebirths of
old civilizations. Grandeur. Seeds of the past becoming flowers and
fruits of the present. Records. Fields that were once Avalon.
TheCaution:Disbelievingbecausetherearenorationalstructuresor
support.Destroyingancientlandsormonumentsbecauseofreligious
beliefs or greed. The devastation and ruin of Iraq in order for the
modernworldtosucceed.Projectingthesinsoftheworldontopeople
or places that are foreign.
Aquarius 30
We are like ignorant shepherds
living on a site where great
civilizations once flourished.
The shepherds play with the
fragments that pop up to the
surface,having no notion of the
beautiful structures of which
they were once a part.
Allan Bloom
Man has been crying since
ancient times about the
deterioration of civilization.
Jason Lewis
More than any time in history
mankind faces a crossroads.
One path leads to despair and
utter hopelessness,the other to
total extinction.Let us pray that
we have the wisdom to choose
correctly.
Woody Allen
If it should turn out that we have
mishandled our own lives as
several civilizations before us
have done,it seems a pity that
we should involve the violet and
the tree frog in our departure.
Loren Eiseley
The earth laughs in flowers.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Letting a hundred flowers
blossom and a hundred schools
of thought contend is the policy
for promoting the progress of
the arts and the sciences and a
flourishing culture in our land.
MaoTse-Tung

<<<PAGE 354>>>
PISCES
W
331
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CROWDED PUBLIC MARKET PLACE
Commentary: ‘A Crowded Public Market Place’ brings to mind
images of people bargaining, buying, selling and looking at the
products for sale and exchanging thoughts and pleasantries. In
a ‘Public Market Place’ many different things are on display,
depending on the current economy and how well people’s needs
can be met. As the ‘Market’ is ‘Crowded’, there are many people
bustling as they move around. People come together, meet each
other, and learn about life in their community. They keep up with
the news of what’s going on while bargaining or buying food,
clothing and other necessities.
Oracle: This pictures products being available for sale, barter
or investment. Depending on how you see things, the best–and
possibly also the worst–aspects of the products available to the
community are on display. You may be able to contribute as well
as benefit from this. Getting yourself or your products “out there”
where they can be appreciated will get you into the game – or
is it just the rat race? What can you do to ensure that you can
get a fair share of the rewards or the money changing hands? If
you are a salesperson, are you prepared to have your “wares”
out in the open where they can be criticized and evaluated? If
you are a buyer, it is likely that you will find what you’re looking
for, and possibly more, if you look long enough. Do you know
how to bargain, close the sale and get the best deal? There may
be questions as to whether things are worth the price placed
on them. Ensuring that whatever you have to sell or buy is
worthwhile, on all levels – the emotional, mental, physical or
spiritual, will protect your good name, reputation or financial
status. Are gains and investments equally balanced?
Keywords: Human interchange. Bartering. Commercialism.
Shopping centers, markets. The Internet. People fulfilling each
other’s desires. Buyers and sellers. Classifieds. Consumables.
Money changing hands. Products of all kinds. Globalization—its
rewards and trappings. Shops and landlords. Storage, stockpiles
and stocktaking. Bargains and bargaining. The rules of fair trade.
Competition. Public opinion. The economy. Trade embargoes.
Big business. The Stock market. Advertising.
The Caution: Being too stingy or greedy to share benefits. Airing
ones “laundry”, emotions or possessions in public. Panicking from
feeling “crowded in”. Exploiting for greed. Disputes over costs.
Monopolies. Not letting anything get in the way of making a buck.
Always bargaining for one’s own advantage. Ripoffs. Sweatshops.
Being too busy to enjoy people.
Pisces 1
Civilization consists in the
multiplication and refinement
of human wants.
Robert Millikan
Strategy should evolve out of
the mud of the marketplace,not
in the antiseptic environment of
an ivory tower.
Al Ries
He that does not ask will never
get a bargain.
French Proverb
Call someone your lord and
he’ll sell you in the slave market.
Saudi Arabian Proverb
Markets change,tastes change,
so the companies and the
individuals who choose to
compete in those markets must
change.
AnWang
Everything is worth what its
purchaser will pay for it.
Syrus Publilius
The market came with the
dawn of civilization and it is not
an invention of capitalism… If
it leads to improving the well
being of the people there is no
contradiction with socialism.
Mikhail Gorbachev
The market is a place set apart
where men may deceive each
other.
Diogenes Laertius

<<<PAGE 355>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
332
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SQUIRREL HIDING FROM HUNTERS
Commentary: ‘A Squirrel Hiding From Hunters’ is an image of
fear, worry and apprehension. The ‘Squirrel’ senses it is somehow
threatened,orthatitsverysurvivalisatrisk.The‘Squirrel’isafraidto
comeoutintotheopenbecauseofaperceptionthatsomethingisout
to get them, whether it is true or not. There’s a need, or an instinct,
to hide from the threatening or aggressive elements in life.
Oracle: Is someone fretting about their position or future? There
may be a sense of aggression in the air where you, or someone you
know, may be one of the smaller players. Sometimes the “enemy” is
actually notreally there,andwemakeit upthrough fear orparanoia.
To be cautious is wise, but hiding oneself away can lead to missed
opportunities for any kind of nourishment and the possibility
of freedom, sunshine and basking in the light. The provision of
nourishment and sustenance may be difficult if one feels somehow
threatened. This feeling of “threat” can happen on any level. It may
have been a necessary process to go through the fright, care and
worry facing you, but the time has to eventually come when you can
feel safe and able to enjoy life. Is your neighborhood threatening or
unsafeinsomeway?Althoughwemaynotliketoadmitit,sometimes
‘Hiding’ away is the best option, whether your fears are real or
merely imagined. This can give you time to sort things through
in your heart and mind to decide what your next move will be.
This Symbol can bring nervousness and a lack of sleep. If you feel
victimized and “holed-up” in this matter, perhaps a safer home, or
living environment, would make things easier. It is true that if we
project fear out into our environment, it will most likely manifest
in a reaction or event somewhere. What creative solutions can you
employ to ensure a safe outcome for all concerned? After all, do the
‘Hunters’ really want to shoot a ‘Squirrel’?
Keywords: Using tactics to ensure survival. ‘Hiding’ one’s self away.
Notsteppingoutintothebigwideworldforfearofmakingthewrong
move. Security systems. Caution and reserve. Using commonsense.
Things or people that feel tiny, uncertain or insecure. Refuges and
the need for them. Staying out of people’s way. Staying home. Locks
and keys. Stockpiling for harder times.
The Caution: People picking on each other. Being bullied out of
what you deserve. Giving those “out there” more power than they
warrant. Not trusting life. Paranoia. Running away from things. Not
wanting to go out and socialize. Truancy. Not speaking up for fear
of being shot down. Threats of terrorism. Having to lie about one’s
whereabouts.Notansweringthedoor.Beingcagedin.Agoraphobia.
Claustrophobia.
Pisces 2
Why not go out on a limb? Isn’t
that where the fruit is?
Frank Scully
God gives the nuts but he does
not crack them.
German Proverb
Of all the thirty-six alternatives,
running away is best.
Chinese Proverb
There is perhaps nothing so bad
and so dangerous in life as fear.
Jawaharlal Nehru
Giving advice to a stupid man
is like giving salt to a squirrel.
Kashmiri Proverb
A sly rabbit will have three
openings to its den.
Chinese Saying
The fox has many tricks.The
hedgehog has but one.But that
is the best of all.
Desiderius Erasmus
One of the rules of caution is
not to be too cautious.
Bahya ibn Paquda
Fear defeats more people than
any other one thing in the
world.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Never feel self-pity,the most
destructive emotion there is.
How awful to be caught up in
the terrible squirrel cage of self.
Millicent Fenwick

<<<PAGE 356>>>
PISCES
W
333
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PETRIFIED FOREST,AN ETERNAL
RECORD OF A LIFE LIVED LONG AGO
Commentary: ‘A Petrified Forest’ brings to mind fossils and
insects stuck in amber and other remnants of ages past. They
are ‘Records’ that have long been around to remind us of how
life was in more ancient times. That it is ‘An Eternal Record of a
Life Lived Long Ago’ shows that the achievements of life do not
necessarily disappear when we move on, or go through major
change or the death of the old. Things continue to exist such as
records, memories, art, literature, photographs, letters, emails,
etc.
Oracle: There’s a need to retrieve, sort through, or go over
‘Records’ from the past in some way. This may be the time to look
to these histories or to appreciate their value and relevance to life
today. However, memories from the past can freeze up life in the
present and hold us in an unmovable state. Sometimes difficult
or painful memories from childhood can inhibit and stop the
processes of new growth in the present. Is the past stopping you
from growth or are worries about age freezing you? Is the situation
facing you stuck in time without a clear understanding of how to
proceed? Therapies can act to reawaken memories or knowledge
from out of the past, even when it looks like everything has
dried up or died. Perhaps you’re learning about the importance
of keeping records; the past can so easily be lost and it can be
difficult, if not impossible, to accurately remember or recall it.
Try looking at your ‘Records’, your memories and things such
as photographs and diaries from years gone by. New life can be
found as long as one is willing to look. Getting the “dead wood”
out of your life, whether it is clogging up your cupboards, your
relationships, your emotional life, even the garden, etc., can clear
the way for the growth of new life.
Keywords: Remnants from the past. Stillness. Agelessness.
Plastic surgery. Being able to withstand life’s storms. Resilience.
Crystals, diamonds, gemstones. Beauty that remains ageless.
Wood and lacquered wood. Coal, oil and petrochemicals. Diets.
Dependability. Family histories. Keeping records. Amber. Fossils.
Geology. Archeology. Ancient remnants. Mental and emotional
filing cabinets. Lingering evidence. Petrified wood. Photographs
and photography. Stones. Stone monuments. Diaries.
The Caution: Rigidity, immobility, inflexibility. Being frozen.
Not letting go of difficulties. Hanging on for grim death. Feeling
stuck. Destroying the old. Severing links to the past. Keeping
tabs. Memories that destroy the present.
Pisces 3
The tendency of old age to the
body,say the physiologists,is
to form bone.It is as rare as it
is pleasant to meet with an old
man whose opinions are not
ossified.
J.F.Boyse
A photograph never grows
old.You and I change,people
change all through the months
and years,but a photograph
always remains the same.How
nice to look at a photograph of
mother or father taken many
years ago.You see them as
you remember them.But as
people live on,they change
completely.That is why I think a
photograph can be kind.
Albert Einstein
Every scientific truth goes
through three states:first,
people say it conflicts with the
Bible;next,they say it has been
discovered before.Lastly,they
say they always believed it.
Louis Agassiz
Keep some souvenirs of your
past,or how will you ever prove
it wasn’t all a dream?
Ashleigh Brilliant
Language is the amber in which
a thousand precious and subtle
thoughts have been safely
embedded and preserved.
Richard C.Trench

<<<PAGE 357>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
334
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
HEAVY CAR TRAFFIC LINKING TWO
SEASIDE RESORTS
Commentary: ‘Heavy Car Traffic Linking Two Seaside Resorts’
pictures ‘Traffic’ streaming along a road or thoroughfare. The
journey to and from desirable places like ‘Seaside Resorts’ can be
difficult and frustrating as many people may be in the same area,
having the same destination. When the situation is ‘Linking Two
Seaside Resorts’, it can be even more difficult with traffic bank-ups,
delays and accidents, particularly at peak-hour. If the “drivers” don’t
follow the codes of good driving by merging politely and allowing
people to come into the flow of ‘Traffic’, there can be “road rage”,
impatience and intolerance.
Oracle: This can show communications and linkages between
separate worlds leading to increased pleasure OR frustration,
confusion or psychic indigestion. There’s a need for patience and
give-and-takeasthereisalotgoingonandconfusioncansetinifone
doesn’tfollowtherulesofthegame.Abidingbyacceptablerulesand
procedures along with common sense will ensure a smooth flow of
operations. You may feel like you are getting stuck in a pattern that
continually bounces back and forth, never arriving at any final or
desirabledestination.Thiscanbeverytiring.Itisimportanttorealize
that although being “squeezed-in” can bring on a sense of panic or
discomfort, the chances are that it will not be permanent and there
is probably something better and more pleasurable waiting for you
onceyougetoutofthecurrentsituation.Seeifyoucangetsometime
out from running around, mentally, emotionally or physically. This
Symbol can show someone who loves pleasure, being easily bored
or distracted by what seem to be better offers or opportunities, and
continually on the lookout for better places or people. Much time
can be lost on the journey only to find that you are in the same sort
of position you were in in the first place.
Keywords: Going with the flow. Running back and forth. Having
to move continually. Pollution and car exhaust. Rush hour and
road-rage. Plans for arrivals and departures. Public holidays. Traffic
jams. Traffic banking up. Having trouble making left hand turns.
Detours. Packing and unpacking. Luggage. Travel itineraries.
Impasses. Nervous systems. Urine therapy. Constant phone calls.
Switchboard jams. Heat and smog.
The Caution: Creating barriers. Constant traffic stopping the
possibility of real human interchange. Claustrophobia. Feeling
like there is no escape. Exhaustion due to everyday hustle and
bustle. Running out of fuel. Accidents. Taking the long way round.
Blockages.
Pisces 4
I’m astounded by people who
want to“know”the universe
when it’s hard enough to find
your way around Chinatown.
Woody Allen
When everything’s coming your
way,you’re in the wrong lane.
StephenWright
Maybe I’m lucky to be going so
slowly,because I may be going
in the wrong direction.
Ashleigh Brilliant
When you come to a roadblock,
take a detour.
Mary Kay Ash
In between goals is a thing
called life,that has to be lived
and enjoyed.
Sid Caesar
All men should strive to learn
before they die,what they are
running from,and to,and why.
JamesThurber
Every road has two directions.
Russian Proverb
Everywhere is walking distance
if you have the time.
StevenWright
To know the road ahead,ask
those coming back.
Chinese Proverb
I'm wanted at the traffic jam,
they're saving me a seat.
Leonard Cohen

<<<PAGE 358>>>
PISCES
W
335
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A CHURCH BAZAAR
Commentary: ‘A Church Bazaar’ is an image of people in a
community coming together to have fun, have something to eat
and drink, get a bargain, and possibly make some new friends.
This ‘Bazaar’ could be something that the community has long
been anticipating, or it could be a more regular event. Either way,
there are things brought and sold, fun and gossip to be had and
new relationships forged. For some, there is a considerable amount
of work to be done. Money from the ‘Bazaar’ often goes to the
‘Church’ or to help people in need in the community.
Oracle: This Symbol shows the pooling of talents and resources
to help people or create uplifting experiences for others. It
also represents old-fashioned values brought to the community
through simple commerce and the warmth of sharing. This is
primarily a time for group cooperation to benefit the people of
the community. People cooperate and get involved in activities that
have a people-centered outcome rather than a purely economic
one. In this situation, you may be unable to achieve your goals on
your own, so a certain amount of trust must be bestowed on those
around you. Altruistic and selfless attitudes should be employed.
The community can be enriched in many ways from displays of
togetherness, giving and sharing, and through charitable works.
There can, however, be a tendency to use faith or communal
goodwill to extract money or services from people. Be sure that
the benefits go to the correct causes, not simply for one’s own gain.
However, someone may need to give up always doing or giving
for others, in order to receive. There are often small rewards here,
but they can be bigger or better than you first realized or prove to
be more important than they first appeared. For the ‘Bazaar’ to be
successful, people need to gather together the bits and pieces for
the sale, bring the jars of jam, organize the stalls and ensure that
the community knows about it.
Keywords: Overcoming loneliness and alienation. Selling things.
The issue of real worth. A lot of effort for small rewards. Small
scale commercial bartering and interchange. The collection plate.
Generosity and charitable community attitudes. Jars of jam and
things handmade. Bric-a-brac. Bargains. Practical spirituality.
Volunteers. People sharing the load. Charity work. Money raising.
Garage or yard sales. Second hand clothes.
The Caution: Spiritual or social exclusivity. Giving things smaller
worth than they deserve. Using people. Deception on the grounds
of faith. Fussing about small details. Fighting over “position”. Issues
of territory. Pushy people. Social boundaries that exclude some.
Pisces 5
Sharing is sometimes more
demanding than giving.
Mary Bateson
One man gives freely,yet grows
all the richer;another withholds
what he should give,and only
suffers want.
The Bible
He who bestows his goods
upon the poor shall have as
much again,and ten times
more.
John Bunyan
Some people give time,some
money,some their skills and
connections,some literally give
their life’s blood.But everyone
has something to give.
Barbara Bush
If you have great wealth,give
alms out of your abundance;
if you have but little,distribute
even some of that.But do
not hesitate to give alms.
Apocrypha
Charity has its own rewards.
Anon
Never let your zeal outrun
your charity.The former is but
human,the latter is divine.
Hosea Ballou
In necessary things,unity;in
doubtful things,liberty;in all
things,charity.
Anne Baxter

<<<PAGE 359>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
336
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PARADE OF ARMY OFFICERS IN
FULL DRESS
Commentary: ‘A Parade of Army Officers in Full Dress’. They have
smartened themselves up, put on their uniforms and gathered
together in a display put on for the sake of the community. There’s
a need for them to follow protocol and show a brave, cohesive
face for the sake of the ‘Parade’. Their morale needs to be high
and upbeat.
Oracle: There is a need to be aware of duty, honor and the
protection of higher ideals. You may be a part of something big and
worthwhile. Wearing some kind of “uniform” may be required to
show allegiance to a particular cause, country, relationship or other
area of life. Wearing the “right clothes” and presenting the “right
image” can lead to feelings of acceptance, respect and belonging.
Dedication, discipline and duty bring their own kinds of rewards.
However, sometimes people would rather not have to put in all
the effort for little apparent return. Whatever, showing pride and
solidarity will help this situation move forward. There are issues of
having to show one’s “authority” in public. One may have to learn
to withstand criticism or feelings of just being “one of the crowd”.
Maybe there’s a desire for, or a fear of, typecasting: being cast in a
stereotypical mold. Do you really belong in this situation, or would
you really rather go AWOL? Are you being bullied and told what to
do and how to live your life? Perhaps you feel like you’ve signed
up for a commitment and, at times, you do not want to put in the
work. What procedures must be followed here? This ‘Parade’ is
something that will eventually pass by. Putting on your best face
and joining with others will ensure success.
Keywords: National pride on display. Reminders of those putting
life and limb on the line for kin and country. Uniforms, hats.
People seeking recognition from the community, regardless of
what they’ve personally achieved. Patriotism. Memories of war.
Being committed to service. Medals. Stripes. Uniformity. Grinning
and bearing it. Projecting the “right image”. Drills and routines.
Displays of courage. Assembling together. Braiding and piping. Spit
and polish. Parades and marching. Police and law enforcement.
Guns and bayonets. The importance of looking good.
The Caution: “Stiff” and unfeeling displays. Having special
privileges that others don’t. Doing what one must do. Hiding
behind a façade. Not being prepared, or able, to show one’s true
self. “Drill sergeants” who scream and shout. People parading their
importance. False courage. Taking the glory away from the little
people. Wearing anything.
Pisces 6
What a curious phenomenon
it is that you can get men to
die for the liberty of the world
who will not make the little
sacrifice that is needed to free
themselves from their own
individual bondage.
Bruce Barton
Duty is the sublimest word in
our language.Do your duty in
all things.You cannot do more.
You should never do less.
Robert E.Lee
Pressed into service means
pressed out of shape.
Robert Frost
Every generation of Americans
needs to know that freedom
consists not in doing what we
like,but in having the right to
do what we ought.
Pope John Paul
Parades should be classed as
a nuisance and participants
should be subject to a term in
prison.
Will Rogers
Eternal nothingness is fine if
you happen to be dressed for it.
Woody Allen
If you look good and dress well,
you don’t need a purpose in life.
Robert Pante

<<<PAGE 360>>>
PISCES
W
337
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
ILLUMINATED BY A SHAFT OF LIGHT,
A LARGE CROSS LIES ON ROCKS
SURROUNDED BY SEA AND MIST
Commentary: ‘Illuminated By a Shaft of Light, a Large Cross Lies
on Rocks Surrounded By Sea and Mist’ is an image that inspires
feelings of chaos and misplaced loyalties. It can feel as though
something has been unjustly sacrificed and things have come to
nothing. Christ was forsaken on ‘A Large Cross’. The ‘Cross’ can
indicate a crucifix and can show the shouldering of trouble and
misfortune or faith and hope. The ‘Shaft of Light’ indicates that
spiritual and creative help is at hand.
Oracle: There could be a feeling that life has not been “good”
enough. Thoughtsof helplessnesscancome from feelingas though
one’s life is finished and that all is lost. Perhaps one’s aim was
too high and things have came crashing down. Feeling forsaken
or used in relationships can lead to a sense of loss of belonging
or identity. It may indeed seem that much has been lost, but do
we really have to continue to suffer so much? Seeing the positive
or the spiritual messages that come in dark moments can shed
new understandings that transcend even the most difficult times.
With faith and a positive outcome in mind, you may experience
a true awakening, or a reconnection with your spiritual ideals
and hope for the future. A sign may come soon to show that you
are on the right track to recovery of life and love. Letting go of
outworn relationships, allegiances or beliefs will assist you to
move on with a stronger sense of self. However, are there still
some worthwhile and wonderful things that can be salvaged or
things to be grateful for? Concentrate on ‘The Shaft of Light’ as
this can lead you to see that ‘Light’ is indeed all around you.
Keywords: Renewed dedication after loss. Looking for signs of
hope and recovery. Coming to terms with loss or failure. Rocks,
mist, howling winds on coasts. Crosses of faith. Important and
substantial sacrifices. Being devastated by events. Being in the
“spotlight” in difficult times. Finding the way through the dark.
The need for sacrifice. Alternative religions. Stepping outside
religious boundaries.
TheCaution: Lost faith. Hopes dashed. Giving up. Being shattered
by the constraints of life. Depression. Feeling like one is being
sacrificed, sometimes for nothing. Unable to see through the
fog. Scorn, persecution and attack because of religious or social
reasons. Hopelessness. Things grim, dark and foreboding.
Pisces 7
Crosses are ladders that lead to
heaven.
Proverb
In order for the light to shine so
brightly,the darkness must be
present.
Danny Devito
No pain,no palm;no thorns,
no throne;no gall,no glory;no
cross,no crown.
William Penn
Call on God,but row away from
the rocks.
Indian Proverb
When things are at the worst
they begin to mend.
Proverb
For the truly faithful,no miracle
is necessary.For those who
doubt,no miracle is sufficient.
Nancy Gibbs
We see but dimly through the
mists and vapors;Amid these
earthly dampsWhat seem to
us but sad,funeral tapers May
be heaven’s distant lamps.
Longfellow
Faith is one of the forces by
which men live,and the total
absence of it means collapse.
William James
Forgive,oh Lord,my little jokes
on thee and I’ll forgive the big
ones on me.
Robert Frost

<<<PAGE 361>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
338
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A GIRL BLOWING A BUGLE
Commentary: ‘A Girl Blowing a Bugle’ brings to mind someone
performing reveille; the ‘Bugle’ call used in the armed forces
announcing that it is time to “rise and shine”. The ‘Bugle’ is a
brass-wind instrument, somewhat like a trumpet, but usually
without keys or valves. It has been used mostly for military calls
and signals, but it’s also sometimes used as a hunting horn. Its
chief function is to sound, to summon, to signal by blowing a
‘Bugle’ call. In dream imagery, the ‘Blowing of a Bugle’ foretells
fortunate things coming your way.
Oracle: You may need to sound the call to wake up those around
you, or perhaps be woken yourself. The situation facing you may
be bogged down in irrational complexity, when everybody needs
to have a central focus and be rallying and going for the objective.
There may be unexpected revelations and something may take
you by shock. If somebody is “sounding off” loudly, it can cause
irritation and upset. Is it you, or another, that’s making all the
noise? There may need to be a balance around exactly how much
noise one should make. Having a cause to loudly “trumpet” can
make people respond by pulling back or being disinterested.
Keeping a balance between excited enthusiasm, forward
momentum and just plain making noise will bring rewards of
some kind – even if it only wakes up those around you. ‘Blowing
the Bugle’ too early, or too forcefully, can put people off, which
can be the exact opposite of what’s desired. This can lead to
people not listening, indeed even running away, instead of being
aroused to their duty. Does everyone around want to hear the
message that’s being trumpeted, or are they trying, or fighting,
to cover their ears? Using simple, receptive innocence will get
the situation on track.
Keywords:Soundingthecall.Awakeningalltoaction.Goingonand
on about something. Loudspeakers, telephones, announcements.
Being prepared to state one’s case. Calling attention to one’s
self. Blowing your own trumpet. Whistleblowers. Heralding
and proclaiming the dawn. Rise and shine! Girls in a man’s
world. Leading the charge. Resurrection. Mass announcements.
Advertising campaigns. Alarm clocks. Ear plugs. Blind folds. Break
the fast. Proclamations.
TheCaution: Making unwarranted and disturbing noise. Showing
off. Unbalanced messages. Evangelists and politicians. Sounding
the call but not making the grade. Being annoying. Trumpeting
about one’s achievements. Not listening to people.
Pisces 8
If you wish in this world to
advance,Your merits you’re
bound to enhance;You must
stir it and stump it,and blow
your own trumpet,Or trust me,
you haven’t a chance.
William Gilbert
The very essence of leadership is
that you have to have a vision.
You can’t blow an uncertain
trumpet.
Theodore Hesburgh
He seems determined to make a
trumpet sound like a tin whistle.
Aneurin Bevan
If the trumpet gives an
uncertain sound,who shall
prepare himself for the battle?
The Bible
No trumpets sound when the
important decisions of our
life are made.Destiny is made
known silently.
Agnes George DeMille
Stay we no longer,dreaming
of renown,but sound the
trumpets,and about our task.
William Shakespeare
Trumpet in a herd of elephants;
crow in the company of cocks;
bleat in a flock of goats.
Malayan Proverb

<<<PAGE 362>>>
PISCES
W
339
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THERACEBEGINS:INTENTON
OUTDISTANCINGHISRIVALS,AJOCKEY
SPURSHISHORSETOGREATSPEED
Commentary:‘TheRaceBegins:IntentonOutdistancingHisRivals,
a Jockey Spurs His Horse to Great Speed’ is an image of competition,
speedandexcitement.The‘Jockey’hasonegoalinmind;heis‘Intent
on Outdistancing His Rivals’.
Oracle: The race is on and you may feel that you are near the finish,
but there is no guarantee of victory. Although it is time to extract
all available energy possible into the situation, make sure you’re not
expendingittooquicklyandnotreallygettinganywhereorachieving
anythingoflastingvalue.Becarefulnottoboltoutofthegatewithout
thoughtoftheramifications.Watchingyourcompetitorsbringssome
reassuranceregardingyourposition,butyoucan’talwaysbelooking
around, you have to get on with the job at hand. What can you do in
thissituationtoensure“thewin”?Wantingtobebetterandfasterand
wanting the prize can lead to incredible feats and accomplishments,
and this is to be admired and praised. What efforts will push you
further, faster, than the rest of the field? Having a one-sighted goal
of winning the race can lead to a wonderful victory. However, it can
also bring a kind of addiction to outdo others. It can lead to wanting,
andneeding,towinregardlessofthecost.Thiscanalienateyoufrom
others, especially if attention is always solely on the goal of winning.
Be wary of expending your energy too soon as it can lead to running
out of steam before the finish line. Being ‘Intent on Outdistancing’
one’s ‘Rivals’ can also lead to feelings of wanting to outdo your own
effortsagainandagain.Seeingyourgoalandheadingstraighttowards
it can see you taking first place but how’s your training for this
situation? Have you done the groundwork in order to compete?
Keywords: Competitiveness and high ambitions. Wanting to
win, sometimes against the odds. Losing and gaining weight.
Weightlessness. Racing to be first at things. Demanding quick flight.
Bolting out of the gate. Aggressive desires. Exhilaration. Wanting
to better oneself. Being on the home run. Speed and the need for
it. Facing forward with great intensity. Rivals and competitors. The
value of training. Horsemanship. Discipline. Energy poured into the
drive to succeed. Starting whistles, pistols or lights.
The Caution: Galloping at full speed prematurely. Being too
ambitious. Ruthless measures. Jumping the gun. Doing anything to
winorsucceed.Beingpushyorsingleminded.Runningoutofsteam
before the finish line. Weight dropping off too quickly. Sabotage or
blocking other’s efforts. Reigning in energy at the last moment.
Pisces 9
Youwereborntowin,buttobe
awinner,youmustplantowin,
preparetowin,andexpecttowin.
Zig Ziglar
Courage is being scared to death
but saddling up anyway.
JohnWayne
What it comes down to is that
anybody can win with the best
horse.What makes you good is if
you can take the second or third-
best horse and win.
Vicky Aragon
Half the failures in life arise from
pulling in one’s horse as he is
leaping.
A.W.Hare
When my horse is running good,
I don’t stop to give him sugar.
William Faulkner
Seize the day.
Horace
I began to suggest that thought,
which I had always before
looked on as a cart-horse to be
driven,whipped and plodding
between shafts,might be really a
Pegasus,so suddenly did it alight
beside me from places I had no
knowledge of.
Joanna Field
We tolerate shapes in human
beings that would horrify us if
we saw them in a horse.
William Ralph Inge

<<<PAGE 363>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
340
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN AVIATOR IN THE CLOUDS
Commentary: ‘An Aviator in the Clouds’ is an image of a pilot
in his plane flying at such a high altitude that he is amongst the
‘Clouds’. It must be exhilarating to be up so high and observing
this wonderful other realm. However, flying high can lead to
feelings of being cut off and separate from reality and the real
world and it is only a matter of time before the ‘Aviator’ must
come down out of the ‘Clouds’ as the constraints of his more
earth-bound existence eventually kick in.
Oracle: There may be a need to transcend what’s going on and to
rise above difficulties. You may find that you have to rely on your
intellectual or emotional skills to take you above and beyond your
current situation. Just be aware that you may not be seeing the
complete picture very clearly at the moment. Alternatively, you
may be actively evading the real truth. If you take special notice,
you will be able to see through illusions, to see through surface
appearances and observe things that others may miss. Where are
you sailing in the sky? Is it too high up to be able to really “see”
anything? Do you feel the need to disconnect with what’s going
on and to simply observe instead of becoming involved? What will
happen if you keep flying without watching how much fuel you
have at your disposal, and you run out? Whatever the situation,
put your energy into enjoying the journey. Watch, observe and
learn about your life from a heightened perspective. Are you the
'Pilot' or a co-pilot?
Keywords: Elevated views. Always seeing the best in people and
things. Peace and tranquility. The longing for transcendence.
Not seeing limitations. Being in a refined “head space”. Mastery.
Flight, planes, pilots. Avoidance of time constraints. Pollyanna
attitudes. Free flights of fantasy and escapism. The need for
accurate navigation. Being in charge of the controls. Seeking
higher truths. Maps. Compasses. Global satellite positioning.
Clouds. Mist and fog. Hang-gliding.
The Caution: Sailing through difficulties or missing what’s really
going on. Escapist use of alcohol and drugs, etc. Lack of grounded
energy or reality. Being unearthed. Escaping responsibilities.
Isolating oneself. Completely missing the point. Feeling high and
mighty and above everyone else, particularly with intellectual
skills. Wrong turns. Missing the signs. Feeling like you're living
in a fog. Disconnecting from others, leading to isolation. Losing
the plot. Taking huge risks. One's head being separate from the
body.
Pisces 10
Here’s a riddle for Our Age:when
the sky’s the limit,how can you
tell you’ve gone too far?
Rita Dove
No bird soars too high if he
soars with his own wings.
William Blake
Flying might not be all plain
sailing,but the fun of it is worth
the price.
Amelia Ehrhart
No flying machine will ever
fly from NewYork to Paris …
[because] no known motor can
run at the requisite speed for
four days without stopping.
OrvilleWright
As we do at such times,I turned
on my automatic pilot and
went through the motions of
normalcy on the outside,so
that I could concentrate all my
powers on surviving the near-
mortal wound inside.
Sonia Johnson
Don’t“over-control”like a novice
pilot.Stay loose enough from
the flow that you can observe it,
modify,and improve it.
Donald Rumsfeld

<<<PAGE 364>>>
PISCES
W
341
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
MEN TRAVELING A NARROW PATH,
SEEKING ILLUMINATION
Commentary: ‘Men Traveling a Narrow Path, Seeking
Illumination’ is an image of people on a mission, seeking to find
some knowledge or truth. They are on a journey of discovery,
endeavoring to find the answers to questions that may have eluded
them until now. They are ‘Traveling a Narrow Path’, one that
probably has deep meaning, regardless of the perceived outcome
in terms of society’s expectations. This journey is likely to be a
very personal one for each participant, even though there may
be many who are ‘Seeking’ the same things.
Oracle: Sometimes the search for ‘Illumination’, with its high
levels of understanding and idealism, places us at odds with more
conservative, social expectations. It is the ability to persevere
with the search, regardless of the cost, that marks the sincerity
of a journey. Most often this quest is ‘Illuminating’, although it
can sometimes be confusing, as new information comes flooding
into the as yet unformed, or uninformed, conscious awareness.
You will need to reject that which is unworthy on the ‘Path’ as
it could lead to disillusionment about values and what is truly
worth pursuing. This Symbol can indicate the need to go without
many things or having to stick to a strict agenda in order to
accomplish a task, goal or education. It may have taken some
time to find this particular direction in life. Disregarding one’s
more mundane physical needs and emotions may be necessary
in the quest for getting to the place of ambition or attainment.
You may have to leave others behind when you set out. As this is
a ‘Narrow Path’, not all can share the same endeavor or, indeed,
would want to. The rewards are usually rich in some measure as
one moves towards the light, the ‘Illumination’. Maybe you should
ask yourself – are you on ‘a Path’ or a treadmill? Be wary of taking
shortcuts, as these may not lead to the thing that’s intended.
Keywords: People “on the Path”. Sticking to one mindset, diet,
regimen or habit. Having a cause to follow. Not looking sideways.
Awakening one’s base senses in order to progress. Physical
ecstasy. Being in the now. Going towards the light. Staying true
to self. The promise of light at the end of the journey.
The Caution: Blinded by the light. Not knowing where you’re
really going. Disillusionment about what’s been chosen. Being
one-eyed about goals and beliefs. The denial of physical pleasure.
Puritanical behavior. Distractions that stop forward movement.
Narrow mindedness.
Pisces 11
The difficulties you meet will
resolve themselves as you
advance.Proceed,and light will
dawn,and shine with increasing
clearness on your path.
D’Alembert
There are two mistakes one
can make along the road to
truth—not going all the way,
and not starting.
Buddha
On a long journey of human life,
faith is the best of companions;
it is the best refreshment on the
journey;and it is the greatest
property.
Buddha
Awake,arise! Strive for the
Highest,and be in the Light!
Sages say the path is narrow
and difficult to tread,narrow as
the edge of a razor.
Upanishads
Do not say,“I follow the one true
path of the Spirit,”but rather,“I
have found the Spirit walking
on my path,”for the Spirit walks
on all paths.
Khalil Gibran
If you follow your bliss,you
put yourself on a kind of track,
which has been there all the
while waiting for you,and the
life that you ought to be living is
the one you are living.
Joseph Campbell

<<<PAGE 365>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
342
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EXAMINATION OF INITIATES IN
THE SANCTUARY OF AN OCCULT
BROTHERHOOD
Commentary: ‘An Examination of Initiates in the Sanctuary
of an Occult Brotherhood’ pictures students, ‘Initiates’, doing
their ‘Examinations’, and being judged or evaluated by their
elders. They are ‘In the Sanctuary of an Occult Brotherhood’
which suggests that they are somehow “cloistered” or closed off
from the prying eyes of the external world. This may have been
through their own choice or it could have been forced on them
by society.
Oracle: You may find that those above or around you are
judging or testing you. It is difficult to know just what their
qualifications to judge you are, but this is often the nature of
progression through the ranks. Sometimes we need to let others
make their own practical assessments of our individual worth and
‘Examinations’ of any kind can show others the stuff we’re made
of. If you feel that you, or someone else, are being tested and
examined, remember that if you perform at your best that is really
the best that can be done. People being critical of one another
can lead to better behavior, better performances or the like, or
it can lead to feeling judged, violated and intruded upon. There
might be a desire to pull someone down, particularly someone
who seems to be getting “too big for their boots”. Sometimes
it seems that our lives are like lessons, and we are periodically
‘Examined’ to see how we are doing on our "path". Does everyone
want to stay on the same track or are some of them wondering
what they’re doing or where they’re going?
Keywords: The ordeal that comes to any initiate for entrance into
higher realms of being. Hermits. Tests, examinations, having to
prove oneself. Being judged or being judgmental. Being cross-
examined. Rarefied atmospheres that demand personal sacrifice.
Initiations. Proving courage and purity. Trials. The attainment
of knowledge. Apprenticeships. Being a candidate. Finding out
how and where one fits in. One-eyed dedication. Trial by media.
Cults. Rituals.
The Caution: Refusing advice. Arrogance. People saying “I told
you so”. Invading other’s private space. Hiding away because of
fear or social ridicule. Severe trials and tests that strip the joy of
life. People assuming they know the truth about others. Fear of
failure. Not living up to other’s expectations. Narrow mindedness.
Harsh treatment. Going without.
Pisces 12
To avoid criticism,do nothing,
say nothing,be nothing.
Elbert Hubbard
Don’t wait for the last judgment;
it takes place every day.
Albert Camus
GreatSpirit,helpmeneverto
judgeanotheruntilIhavewalked
inhismoccasinsfortwoweeks.
Sioux Indian Prayer
The sage,who is living
outside the routine of the
world,contemplates his own
character,not as an isolated
ego manifestation,but in
relation to the laws of life.He
judges freedom from blame to
be the highest good.
I Ching
I was thrown out of college for
cheating on the metaphysics
exam;I looked into the soul
of the boy sitting next to me.
Woody Allen
Life is a classroom in which
each of us is being tested,tried,
and passed.
RobertThibodeau
These are the times that try
men’s souls.
Thomas Paine
Don't judge a book by it's cover.
Old Saying

<<<PAGE 366>>>
PISCES
W
343
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A SWORD,USED IN MANY BATTLES,
IS NOW IN A MUSEUM
Commentary: ‘A Sword’ that has been ‘Used in Many Battles’ is
‘Now in a Museum’. It has most likely seen many struggles, battles
and conflicts. It may have had to defend the honor of someone
or something, and now it is placed in a ‘Museum’ where people
can come and look at it and wonder at its history. The ‘Sword’
is such a masculine image, strong, heroic, metallic, sharp, hard
and forbidding. The ‘Sword’ has done its job and now needs to
be put away somewhere where it won’t need to fight or defend.
That it is in ‘A Museum’ points to the fact that it is a reminder of
the battles of days gone by.
Oracle: When reminded of the ‘Battles’ of the past, hopefully
we are influenced towards peace, but we are also uplifted by
the memory of the strength of the participants, their bravery and
valor. You may be faced with the choice of fighting for something
or reasoning with the intellect. This can be confusing if you lack
training or experience in the ways of doing ‘Battle’. The obvious
message is that it’s time to lay down one’s ‘Sword’, not in order
to necessarily surrender, but to stop “the warring”. Perhaps this
pictures someone who doesn’t know when to give up taking
others on and fighting. This Symbol shows it’s time to give up
‘Battling’, to aim now for more peaceful solutions. There may
have been a lot learnt in the ‘Battles’ you’ve experienced, but
the thing that’s best learnt is that continuing to fight may lead to
a bitter end, with no one being a true winner. Now’s the time to
lay down the ‘Sword’ and accept love and peace back into your
life. Putting the ‘Sword’ away in a ‘Museum’ can allow others to
benefit from the struggles that have been undertaken, without
worrying about how this weapon will be used in the future. How
long can one go on battling, fighting and defending?
Keywords: Willpower. Martial arts. Putting aside thoughts of
vengeance and revenge. Hanging up or laying down one’s ‘Sword’.
Trophies of conquest that remind us of the past. History. Aging
and maturing. Retirement. Remnants of battles. Souvenirs of
the past. “Words as swords”. The Spear of Destiny. The Sword
Excalibur. Disarming weapons. The search for truth and justice.
Suits of armor. Peace at last. Sexual impotence.
The Caution: A lack of sensitivity. A pretense of one’s abilities.
Giving up and “falling on one’s sword” from defeat. Grudges.
Wanting to go into ‘Battle’ at the slightest excuse. Selfish agendas.
Weapons of mass destruction or weapons of mass distraction?
Pre-emptive strikes. Defensive behavior. Domestic violence.
Pisces 13
Yet each man kills the thing he
loves,By each let this be heard,
Some do it with a bitter look,
Some with a flattering word,
The coward does it with a kiss,
The brave man with a sword!
OscarWilde
If we could read the secret
history of our enemies we
should find in each man’s life
sorrow and suffering enough to
disarm all hostility.
Longfellow
The basic difference between an
ordinary man and a warrior is
that a warrior takes everything
as a challenge,while an
ordinary man takes everything
as either a blessing or a curse.
Don Juan
Logicislikethesword—those
whoappealtoitshallperishbyit.
Samuel Butler
We are going to have peace
even if we have to fight for it.
Dwight D.Eisenhower
Thewriter,makingeveryeffortto
appearinnocentandnoble,takes
hisrevengewiththepen;while
themurderer,lesshypocritical,
takesitwiththesword.
Christopher Spranger
All who take the sword will
perish by the sword.
The Bible

<<<PAGE 367>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
344
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A WOMAN WRAPPED IN FOX FUR
Commentary: ‘A Woman’ is ‘Wrapped in Fox Fur’. She presents
a beautiful image and one has the sense that she radiates
intelligence, grace and wealth. The ‘Fox Fur’ carries the feeling
of protection being given through the use of wit, tact, diplomacy,
glamour and intellect. There is an aura of “street smarts” about
the ‘Woman Wrapped in Fox Fur, like she could get out of (or
into) any situation that she chooses.
Oracle: Someone is trying to present an image that will enhance
their position. Whether this is you or another, using intelligence
and wit will probably see one through. If, however, the guise,
or disguise, were to be stripped away, would the same qualities
be expressed? You may find that you have to display your
capabilities because you suffer negative prejudice, chauvinism,
or are underestimated. It may be that you are not being listened
to. Difficulties can arise when others misunderstand what it is that
you are projecting and over or under-estimate your message. In
any case, there’s a need to be quick witted and perceptive. Also,
there may be occasion to have to change strategies quickly. This
can show proof of your intelligence and your ability to “think
on your feet”. The display of elegance has to be come not only
from your appearance and your demeanor but also through the
things you say. It is important to be able to deliver and follow
through on the image you portray. Any artificial attempts to try
to fool others about how smart you are may lead to unwarranted
reactions. However, do be wary of focusing solely on others’
perceptions of you. This Symbol can also represent the desire to
show off one’s wealth, as though possessions and material gains
are an example of class and intelligence. You may lose track of
what you truly feel about yourself.
Keywords: Outer expressions of real inner worth. Animal
magnetism and attraction. Intelligence and its display. Cloaks
of feminine wit and sexuality. Beguiling minds. Animal totems
and furs. Perceived beauty. The sense of having class and money.
Beauty, fashion and talent. Being forward and upfront. Sense of
personal style. Grace and composure. Elegance. Knowing what
to say and when. Dressing up. Money spent on beauty. Tempting
others with sexual signals. Perfumes. Pheromones. Taxidermy.
The Caution: False fronts and expressions of wealth. Selling
out for momentary, or monetary, gain. Wrapped in intellectual
superficiality. The fatal allure of beauty. Scoring points solely
through charisma. Being so caught up in fashion and glamor that
one loses a true sense of self. Being overdressed.
Pisces 14
Beauty:That power by which
a woman charms a lover and
terrifies a husband.
Ambrose Bierce
Plain women know more about
men than beautiful women do.
Katharine Hepburn
Instinct is untaught ability.
Alexander Bain
Girls have an unfair advantage
over men:if they can’t get what
they want by being smart,they
can get it by being dumb.
Yul Brynner
Money is better than poverty,
if only for financial reasons.
Woody Allen
There is nothing so agonizing
to the fine skin of vanity as the
application of a rough truth.
Edward G.Bulwer-Lytton
In our society those who are in
reality superior in intelligence
can be accepted by their fellows
only if they pretend they are not.
Marya Mannes
The common practice of
keeping up appearances with
society is a mere selfish struggle
of the vain with the vain.
John Ruskin
For me,elegance is not to pass
unnoticed but to get to the very
soul of what one is.
Christian Lacroix

<<<PAGE 368>>>
PISCES
W
345
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN OFFICER DRILLING HIS MEN IN A
SIMULATED ATTACK
Commentary: ‘An Officer Drilling his Men in a Simulated Attack’.
Sometimesinlife,thedangerofthingsisoverstated,exaggeratedand
overestimated and it looks like all hell is going to break lose at any
minute. However, there is wisdom in practicing being on the alert
to reduce the chance of error or failure when a real ‘Attack’ comes
along. Putting on a show of strength in order to put off threats from
the outside can help promote feelings of safety and solidarity.
Oracle:Youmayneedtorehearseorprepareforadifficultupcoming
situation. It’s true that if we stay alert to the possibility of ‘Attack’
or confrontation, it helps us to respond when it’s really necessary.
However, often the expected ‘Attack’ never eventuates. Sometimes
thereismoreenergyexpendedinthe‘Drilling’oftacticalmaneuvers
than exists in the actual threat itself. The trick is to be able keep on
one’sguard,andtorelaxatthesametime.Peoplecanbeyelledatand
commandedtorespondinacertainwaytothepointwheretheylose
theirsenseofnaturalspontaneity,funandlightheartednessofbeing.
There could be provocation and possibly downright bullying, but it
probably doesn’t have much substance, especially if you don’t allow
it any. Keeping a strong sense of your own authority will ensure a
betteroutcomeforall.Howpreparedareyouforwhatmighthappen?
Are you going over the possible outcomes a little too much, thereby
losing the joy that can be found in relaxing or letting down your
guard? Is there someone picking on you or telling you what to do, or
are you the perpetrator yourself? One exercise for disciplining the
mindistomakeupsomepositivecommandsandapplythemtoyour
everyday thoughts. Try allowing only positive thoughts. Witnessing
the mind for negative, self-defeating or annoying messages can stop
them dead in their tracks.
Keywords: Taking orders to better respond to situations. The
higher self training the lower self. Exercises. Marching and going
through the motions. The need for defense. Seeing ahead. Planning
strategies. Fire drills. Smoke alarms. Being prepared. Issuing orders
and expecting them to be followed through. Discipline. Martial arts
of all kinds. Going over and over possible outcomes. Safeguards put
in place. Gas masks and bomb shelters.
The Caution: Rigid routine for no real or valuable purpose.
Feeling that one has always to be on the defensive. Being under
attack, whether real or imagined. Overreacting to things. Feelings
of unworthiness in the face of battle or confrontation. Victim
consciousness.Fearfulresponses.Gettingotherstorespondthrough
spreading fear. Scare tactics.
Pisces 15
It is hard to fight an enemy who
has outposts in your head.
Sally Kempton
It takes 15,000 casualties to train
a major general.
Ferdinand Foch
We are not ready for an
unforeseen event that may or
may not occur.
Dan Quayle
Do not touch anything
unnecessarily.Beware of pretty
girls in dance halls and parks
who may be spies,as well as
bicycles,revolvers,uniforms,
arms,dead horses,and men lying
on roads—they are not there
accidentally.
Soviet infantry manual,issued
in the 1930’s
A frightened captain makes a
frightened crew.
Lister Sinclair
Military intelligence is a
contradiction in terms.
Groucho Marx
To be prepared against surprise
is to be trained.To be prepared
for surprise is to be educated.
James Carse
You have to be fast on your feet
and adaptive or else a strategy is
useless.
Lou Gerstner

<<<PAGE 369>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
346
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN A QUIET MOMENT,A CREATIVE
INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCES THE
FLOW OF INSPIRATION
Commentary: ‘A Quiet Moment’ is pictured in which ‘A
Creative Individual Experiences The Flow of Inspiration’. The
‘Creative Individual’ can experience rushes of energy, thought
and ‘Inspiration’ through finding some ‘Quiet’ time or through
meditation.
Oracle: The ‘Flow of Inspiration’ will come if you allow it
through and the more creative you allow yourself to be, the
more ‘Inspiration’ there will be. Taking time out for things such
as meditation, looking at art or the beauty of nature will allow
for the peace that’s needed to stop any hurrying thoughts. One’s
whole life can be changed, in a ‘Moment’, when the mind is stilled
and creative solutions are allowed to come through. You may
find that with each idea or ‘Creative Inspiration’ there follows
another and another. This is a great time to relax and go with
the flow neither fighting against anything nor pushing forward.
If things have been hectic in your life and you’re looking for
guidance, hope and inspiration, try spending a ‘Quiet Moment’ by
yourself and allow your intuition to come through. This Symbol
shows that no matter what the problem, it will be resolved in
time spent contemplating it with the right attitude. Negative
thoughts can keep one locked in a cycle of negativity. Closed
minds and fixed attitudes will not help in this situation. You may
find that answers to questions or situations come when you’re
least expecting them, e.g. when you’re in the bath or going for
a walk. Creative projects that have had difficulty being started
(or completed) may indeed begin to find form. Hold on to any
impressions you get and before long you’ll start to see the solution
to your problem or situation.
Keywords: Creativity inspired from above. Openness to higher
forces and ideals. Realizations. Dreams. Channeling thoughts
and feelings. Messages from one’s higher self. Finding solutions.
Moments of calm leading to resolutions. Free flowing thoughts.
The gift of inspiration. Turning on the tap of creativity. Blockages
unblocked.
TheCaution: Being too tired to meditate. Choosing to be unaware
or to sleep instead of thinking purposefully. Not talking about
what needs to be said. Having a lot of ideas that don’t translate
into reality. Shutting off from others. Loud voices in the head.
Schizophrenia.
Pisces 16
There never was a great soul
that did not have some divine
inspiration.
MarcusTullius Cicero
Whatever is your best time
in the day,give that to
communion with God.
HudsonTaylor
Inspiration never arrived when
you were searching for it.
Lisa Alther
Cease trying to work everything
out with your minds.It will get
you nowhere.Live by intuition
and inspiration and let your
whole life be Revelation.
Eileen Caddy
When inspiration does not
come,I go for a walk,go to the
movie,talk to a friend,let go
...The muse is bound to return
again,especially if I turn my
back!
Judy Collins
Wonders will never cease.
David Garrick
What to do when inspiration
doesn’t come:Be careful not to
spook,get the wind up,force
things into position.You must
wait around until the idea
comes.
John Huston
In life you need either
inspiration or desperation.
Anthony Robbins

<<<PAGE 370>>>
PISCES
W
347
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
AN EASTER PROMENADE
Commentary: ‘An Easter Promenade’ is seen. A ‘Promenade’ is
defined as a “leisurely walk taken for pleasure, to display one’s
finery, etc.” The ‘Easter Promenade’ is a celebration of bright
clothes, fancy hats, and competitions, with appearances by such
things as the easter bunny. This is a tradition born more out of the
older celebrations of the spring solstice than the Christian festival
of Easter and the crucifixion, but these separate festivals long ago
became combined and they now compliment each other. In the
northern hemisphere our souls are renewed with the beauty of
spring approaching and the celebration of the resurrection of
Jesus. Feelings of hope and faith are deepened during this very
significant event in the Christian calendar.
Oracle: There is regularly a need to share with others the
celebration of your community’s religious or spiritual aspirations
and ideals. It doesn’t matter whether there is a feeling of actual
religious cohesion amongst the people in this ‘Easter Promenade’,
it’s more about sharing strong community values. Often, the
actual meaning behind the celebration is completely ignored.
New traditions can build on old traditions until, sometimes, the
origins can seem lost, blurred or forgotten. This is not really a
problem as long as it brings people together in an atmosphere
of peace and joy. On a deeper level, there may be other layers of
meaning to these celebrations that have also been lost completely,
but nevertheless leave a vibration or resonance that is in our
unconscious awareness. The ‘Easter Promenade’ is about the
layering of traditions and to some extent the superimposing of
new traditions on the old. No matter how structured or organized
this celebration is, if it’s done with joy and warmth of feeling, it
will inspirit the group, infusing them with a sense of emotional
unity. It is the combination of celebrations of rebirth, fertility and
the communal renewal of faith in the good things of life.
Keywords: Renewed faith in one’s life circumstances. Rising up
from doubt, fear and loss. Public holidays and their celebrations.
Dressing up. Easter bonnets. Easter eggs, chickens and the fertility
rites of spring. Rebirth. Forgiveness. Joy. Spiritual unity. Religious
holidays. Worship. Renewal. Parades. Transformation.
The Caution: Superficial shows of unity. Craving for attention.
Always needing an excuse to get together and unite. Empty
displays of faith or joy. Doing things only because everyone else
is doing them. Feeling lost, alone and forsaken in the crowd. Guilt
trips. Exclusion of other faiths. Religious domination.
Pisces 17
Do not abandon yourselves to
despair....We are the Easter
people and hallelujah is our
song.
Pope John Paul II
I come not to entertain you
with worldly festivities but
arouse your sleeping memory
of immortality.
ParamahansaYogananda
Any ritual is an opportunity for
transformation.
Starhawk
TheEasterfeelingdoesnotend.
Itsignalsanewbeginning,Of
nature,spring,andbrandnewlife,
Andfriendship,peace,andgiving.
ThespiritofEasterisallabout
Hope,love,andjoyfulliving.
Anon
Easter is the gift of hope Easter
is the gift of peace Easter is the
gift of love Let us rejoice in Him,
Who gives them all.
Anon
And when it rains on your
parade,look up rather than
down.Without the rain,there
would be no rainbow.
Jerry Chin

<<<PAGE 371>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
348
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
IN A HUGETENT A FAMOUS
REVIVALIST CONDUCTS HIS MEETING
WITH A SPECTACULAR PERFORMANCE
Commentary: ‘In a Huge Tent a Famous Revivalist Conducts His
Meeting With a Spectacular Performance’. This pictures somebody
who has the ability to get people up and going on a spiritual,
emotional and physical level. Words of hope and redemption and
the giving of one’s self to higher purposes and goals are delivered.
He works hard to ensure that his words strike the minds and hearts
of those listening. Singing and dancing can erupt out of people in
celebration. This is largely the result of the passion of the ‘Famous
Revivalist’ and the audience may be very inspired by the occasion
with people joining in, in some way.
Oracle: You may find there is a need to organize and stage a display
ofthesituation,bringingthecommunitytogetherinacommongoal.
The symbolism of the ‘Huge Tent’ can represent many things; it can
be a school hall, a church, a circus tent, an outdoor arena all the way
up to something such as the worldwide web. It indicates anywhere
people come together to experience a lecture or a performance, or,
as this Symbol pictures ‘A Famous Revivalist’. They gather to listen to
inspired and inspiring messages being delivered. There is a need for
caution, though, as sometimes this can picture situations of hysteria,
overstatingone’scase,orhavingtheaudiencegetoutofcontrol.With
the power to influence or sway groups of people, there needs to be
some feeling of care and moderation. People are often prepared to
listen, but for how long? Is the audience listening? Is the cause just?
The person ‘Conducting His Meeting’ may be arrogant and believe
that only he has the true answers. Sometimes the ‘Revivalist’ may
needtotopuphisownknowledge,feelingsandunderstandingabout
life and spirituality by listening to those around him.
Keywords: Energy and inspiration. Evangelism. Whipped up
emotions. Having a lot to say. Being instructional and dogmatic
about how things should be. Being in charge. Ecstasy. Loud voices.
Conversations that are said out loud. Acoustics affecting sounds.
Preaching.Mindcontrol.Performing.Political,religiousandspiritual
activism. Showmanship. Transformative experiences. Captivated
audiences. The media circus.
TheCaution:Usingspiritualismforgreedyfinancialgain.Overblown
feelings of one’s abilities. Big egos. Hysteria. People whipped-up and
manipulated by those in charge. Having the agenda of controlling
others. Feeling that one has all the answers. Getting het-up about
ideals and beliefs. Manipulation and exploitation. Bigotry.
Pisces 18
One filled with joy preaches
without preaching.
MotherTeresa
A man must have a good deal
of vanity who believes,and
a good deal of boldness who
affirms,that all the doctrines he
holds are true,and all he rejects
are false.
Benjamin Franklin
What is true preaching like?
Instead of preaching to others,
if one worships God all the time,
that is enough preaching.He
who strives to make himself
free is the real preacher.
Hundreds come from all sides,
no one knows whence,to him
who is free,and are taught by
him.When a rosebud blooms,
the bees come from all sides
uninvited and unasked.
Sri Ramakrishna
A fool always finds some
greater fool to admire him.
Nicholas Boileau
Condense some daily
experience into a glowing
symbol,and the audience is
electrified.
RalphWaldo Emerson
Good teaching is one-fourth
preparation and three-fourths
theater.
Gail Godwin

<<<PAGE 372>>>
PISCES
W
349
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MASTER INSTRUCTING HIS
DISCIPLE
Commentary: ‘A Master’ is ‘Instructing His Disciple’. He is giving
his ‘Disciple Instruction’ on how to handle life in the spiritual,
intellectual and emotional realms. The ‘Disciple’ must listen to all
the ‘Master’ says and teaches and must learn from his example.
There’s an old saying, “when the student is ready, the teacher
appears”. It could easily also be “when the student is ready, the
lesson appears” – there are many ways to learn life’s lessons.
Oracle: This is a time for the transfer of higher knowledge and
wisdom. In this situation you may find that you are the teacher,
the ‘Master’, or the pupil, the ‘Disciple’. Remember that it is often
the teacher that learns and the pupil that teaches. Perhaps it’s time
for listening to your own higher wisdom. The teacher can inspire
great personal achievements through teaching the wisdom that
the ‘Disciple’ is ready and willing to learn. These lessons can be
on many levels, from the purest of teaching and education all the
way to downright emotional manipulation: the teachings that are
being passed on can be used to elevate or manipulate the thoughts
and emotions of the ‘Disciple’. People will sometimes believe the
message coming from the ‘Master’ without questioning, merely
because of his charisma and presence. The ‘Master’ may have an
alternate agenda that he wants to fulfill. There is sometimes a need
to separate the actual person of the ‘Master’ from that which he
is teaching, as they are not necessarily the same. The ‘Master’ is
only human, after all. Someone having something worthwhile
to say will find someone who will listen to it.
Keywords: To give and to receive. Lessons that need to be well
learnt. The transfer of knowledge. Taking time to instruct others.
Being willing to both teach and learn. Step-by-step lessons.
Passing on information. Instructions and directions. Laying
down the law with someone. Manuscripts and lessons. Masters.
Gurus. Guiding lights. Reinforcement of knowledge, wisdom and
spirituality. Listening and learning. Knowing what questions to
ask. Doing homework. Being or setting a good example.
The Caution: Dogmatic instruction by rote. Talking down to
others, thinking they know less. Someone having a “know it all”
attitude. Manipulating people for one’s personal agenda. Using
knowledge as power over people. Feeling above everyone else.
Co-dependant behaviour. One-eyed attitudes. Losing oneself in
another.
Pisces 19
Knowledge increases in
proportion to its use—that is,
the more we teach the more we
learn.
H.P.Blavatsky
Teach thy tongue to say I do not
know and thou shalt progress.
Maimonides
By learning you will teach;by
teaching you will learn.
Latin Proverb
Thetrueteacherdefendshis
pupilsagainsthisownpersonal
influence.Heinspiresself-distrust.
Heguidestheireyesfromhimself
tothespiritthatquickenshim.He
willhavenodisciple.
Amos Bronson Alcott
Jesus was all right,but his
disciples were thick and
ordinary.It’s them twisting it
that ruins it for me.
John Lennon
I can tell you,honest friend,what
to believe:believe life;it teaches
better than book or orator.
Goethe
Do not believe what your
teacher tells you merely out of
respect for the teacher.
Buddha

<<<PAGE 373>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
350
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A TABLE SET FOR AN EVENING MEAL
Commentary: ‘A Table’ is ‘Set for an Evening Meal’. This image
brings to mind ‘A Table’ having been prepared, the food cooked
and the hospitality being served up for those who come together
to share. There’s no mention of how many people are to be at this
‘Meal’, but attention has been, or should be, given to the proper
nourishment of body, mind and soul.
Oracle: The ‘Table’ may be set for a celebration, a family, a couple
or just for one. It could be that everything is in place other than
the substance, which may be still in preparation, and those to sit
at the ‘Table’ to appreciate it. If the ‘Table’ is not only ‘Set’, but
also the food ready and the people enjoying the ‘Meal’, there’s
the need for a calm state of mind and a quiet and receptive heart.
Having said that, it’s not always possible to have peace and quiet
at the dinner table. Issues of the day may be brought to the
‘Table’ to be discussed, and these may disturb the atmosphere
or need resolution. Still, it’s important to have a calm and quiet
enjoyment whilst eating, as this ensures a healthy mind and body
This Symbol is often an assurance of that. Having worked hard and
long, you may need to realize that your needs will be met. You may
find that you have prepared the situation well. What you need will
come. Those already at home, as well as those returning home,
will find comfort, safety and sustenance. Remember to attend to
these everyday tasks with a sense of reverence. Try to remember
to say Grace in thanks for the good things that you have.
Keywords: Provision of life’s necessities. Being well nourished.
Having to prepare for others. Issues of “who will serve and who
will eat”. Dinner and dinner parties. Issues of nourishment and
having a roof over one’s head. Food allergies. Food technology.
Breaking bread with others. People bringing a plate to share.
Cutlery, plates, glasses. Wine and water. Diets. Groceries. Doing
the dishes. Making a meal of something. Obesity. Attention to
detail. Hired hands. Catering. Candles. Sharing life's bounty.
The Caution: Making preparations with no ability to nourish
or satisfy. Devouring things or people. Banging on the table
and asking for more. Guilt around issues of providing. Feasts or
famines. Eating syndromes. Empty spaces at the table. Arguing
at meal times. Indigestion and heartburn. People not turning up
for dinner. Overindulging. Consuming people. Not appreciating
life's bounty. Continually having to provide for others. Always
having to come up with what's for dinner.
Pisces 20
You can get through life with
bad manners,but it’s easier
with good manners.
Lillian Gish
There is no sincerer love than
the love of food.
George Bernard Shaw
The reflections on a day well
spent furnish us with joys more
pleasing than ten thousand
triumphs.
Thomas A.Kempis
It is a good thing that life is
not as serious as it seems to a
waiter.
Don Herold
Sometimes you struggle so
hard to feed your family one
way,you forget to feed them
the other way,with spiritual
nourishment.Every body needs
that.
James Brown
God gave teeth;He will give
bread.
Lithuanian Proverb
Man who waits for roast duck
to fly into mouth must wait
very,very long time.
Chinese Proverb
My doctor told me to stop
having intimate dinners for
four.Unless there are three
other people.
OrsonWelles

<<<PAGE 374>>>
PISCES
W
351
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A LITTLE WHITE LAMB,A CHILD AND
A CHINESE SERVANT
Commentary:‘ALittleWhiteLamb,aChildandaChineseServant’is
aSymbolthatshowstheinnocenceandpurityofbothchildhoodand
the animal realm. The ‘Child’ is symbolic of potential and curiosity
and the need for care and supervision; and the ‘Chinese Servant’
showsthefreedomforself-developmentapartfromfamilyinfluence
or dominance. The ‘Little White Lamb’ is of no threat to the ‘Child’
even if things get out of control. The ‘Chinese Servant’ shows that
the safety concerns of the ‘Child’ and, indeed, also of the ‘Lamb’, will
be watched over and monitored. Being a ‘Chinese Servant’, the care
will probably be more lenient than if a parent were involved. There
is likely to be more consideration of the value of life experience and
lessons rather than domination and discipline. The ‘Child’ pictured
mayneedtheguidance,helpandnurturanceofthe‘ChineseServant’
because of special needs or because the parents are too busy with
their own lives to provide childcare.
Oracle: Children can be fascinated by small, young animals, but
can be rough as they test the boundaries of the animal’s tolerance.
A parent may not like to see the ‘Child’ hurting the ‘Lamb’ at all,
whereas the ‘Chinese Servant’ is more likely to give some latitude
in order to learn some lessons. It is natural to try and gain a physical
awareness of one’s situation first. In our earliest years it was the
feeling (or tactile) sense that was initially satisfied. You may need
to get back to the basic understanding of your situation. By looking
at your situation from a kind, caring and considerate perspective,
it will be possible to deal with it or solve it in an efficient manner,
ratherthanbecomingflusteredandreactingharshlyorunjustly.This
Symbol may show the instinct to judge others by what they look
like. Obviously, in this situation, stereotypical images are conjured
up, not only with the ‘Servant, but the ‘Child’ and the ‘Lamb’. It is
important to avoid falling into this trap; instead, try to look under
the surface of things. You may be surprised by what you find.
Keywords: Being protected by higher, more aware, energies. The
privileges money and social status bring. Awareness of the different
levels of situations. Differing perspectives. Helpers, servants. Care.
Beingwatchedover.Watchfulness.Petsandanimals.Thesupervision
of youngsters. Purity of vision. Caring for the child within.
The Caution: Social incompatibility. Purity merely by nature of
wealth. Not having to grow up because of the social environment.
Not taking responsibility for one’s self. Acting like a brat and getting
away with it.
Pisces 21
Children in ordinary dress may
always play with sand.
Hilaire Belloc
The moment the slave resolves
that he will no longer be a
slave,his fetters fall.He frees
himself and shows the way to
others.Freedom and slavery are
mental states.
Gandhi
In the master there is a servant,
in the servant a master.
MarcusTullius Cicero
To maintain a joyful family
requires much from both the
parents and the children.Each
member of the family has to
become,in a special way,the
servant of the others.
Pope John Paul II
We teachers can only help the
work going on,as servants wait
upon a master.
Maria Montessori
If thou are a master,be
sometimes blind;if a servant,
sometimes deaf.
Thomas Fuller
Money is a terrible master but
an excellent servant.
P.T.Barnum

<<<PAGE 375>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
352
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A PROPHET BRINGING DOWN THE
NEW LAW FROM THE MOUNTAIN
Commentary: ‘A Prophet Bringing Down the New Law From The
Mountain’ pictures revelations concerning spirit and truth being
delivered through the agency of a single individual, the ‘Prophet’.
This message, this ‘New Law’ can be “brought down” orally or in
written form in order to be given to the people. ‘Laws’ relate to
the culture of the time and will vary as technology and society
changes, but the ‘Prophet’ is able to manifest ‘Laws’ that will apply
not just for his time, but also for times to come.
Oracle: There is a ‘New Law’ being brought ‘Down From the
Mountain’ and it is important to make it manifest and integrated
into everyday existence. This Symbol can show people watching
and waiting for what someone has to say, as if it will change their
lives in some way. However, in this day and age it is important
not to take what people say as “gospel” without considering your
own beliefs and thoughts and whether these ‘New Laws’ ring
true to your inner being. Beliefs are something that can bring
people together, but they can also just as easily tear people apart.
Being asked, or forced, to take on new beliefs or codes of living
or being can be confronting. This Symbol can also indicate things
being acted out in “biblical proportions”, with huge fanfare and
importance placed on them, and this may be a good thing, but
only you will know whether these apply to you in your life. Misuse
of messages for the personal gain of the one who’s seen as the
‘Prophet’ can lead to alienation and a loss of faith. Although the
principles of ‘Law’ may stay the same, it is the specifics that must
vary in order to accommodate the changing perceptions of the
times. It is wonderful if the message resonates with you, but if it
doesn’t you should be able to choose another code for living.
Keywords: Revelations and channeling of new information.
Truths being revealed. Thoughts, ideas, guidelines. The Ten
Commandments. Laying down the law. New resolutions. New
pathways of living. Social justice messages. The Koran. The Torah.
The Bible. Finding records. People of the book. The Ark of the
Covenant. Newly codified laws. Amendments. The Testaments.
Avatars and guides. Moses. Mt. Sinai. Legislation. Laws enacted.
Legislation.
The Caution: Being told what to do. Believing that one has all
the answers OR believing that someone else has all the answers.
Disregarding the religious ways of the past. Rules set in stone.
The statement “this is what’s going to happen”. Rigid application
of dogmatic moral codes.
Pisces 22
The words printed here are
concepts.You must go through
the experiences.
Frederick Frieseke
Every age hath its book.
The Koran
The 7 Deadly Sins are:Wealth
without work;Pleasure without
conscience;Knowledge without
character;Business without
morality;Science without
humanity;Worship without
sacrifice;Politics without
principle.
Mahatma Gandhi
TheideasIstandforaren’tmine.
IborrowedthemfromSocrates.I
swipedthemfromChesterfield.I
stolethemfromJesus.AndIput
theminabook.Ifyoudon’tlike
theirrules,whosewouldyouuse?
Dale Carnegie
Any fool can make a rule,and
any fool will mind it.
Henry DavidThoreau
Three things it is best to avoid:a
strange dog,a flood,and a man
who thinks he is wise.
Welsh Proverb
There is no such thing as a moral
or an immoral book.Books are
well written,or badly written.
OscarWilde
Only law can give us freedom.
JohannWolfgangVon Goethe

<<<PAGE 376>>>
PISCES
W
353
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MATERIALIZING MEDIUM GIVING
A SEANCE
Commentary: ‘A Materializing Medium’ has a sensitivity to and
awarenessofspiritualforces.Sheis‘GivingaSéance’,andcanmanifest
messages from spirit that are given from the “other side”. Roget's
Thesaurus defines ‘Medium’ as meaning “That by which something
is accomplished or some end achieved: agency, agent, instrument,
instrumentality,instrumentation,intermediary.”Sheisan“instrument”
whoisabletoreceiveradiations,frequencies,orvibrationsthatcannot
easily be sensed by most people.
Oracle: Many things can be ‘Materialized’ in our lives; they can come
seemingly out of nowhere. They may be messages, voices, noises,
storiesorepisodesfromone’slife.Objectscanbe‘Materialized’aswell;
wecanconjurethemup.Sometimesitcancauseconfusion,othertimes
enlightenment.Realizingthatonecancreatetheirownrealityandthe
responsibilityimpliedcanleadtothebeliefthatjustaboutanythingis
possibleinone’slife.Thethingsthatare‘Materialized’canbetangible
and rewarding things, however, there should be some caution as
sometimes they can have more to do with drama and show rather
thanhavinganyrealorlastingsubstance.Sitwithanynewimpressions
you may be receiving until you understand the authenticity or depth.
Ifyouhavetodosomethingorperforminfrontofpeople,restassured
that with the right attitude and a little preparation there should be no
problem.Youmayhavethetalentandtheabilitytomakethingsupas
you go along. Energy can feel as though it is coursing “through you”.
Notice the physical evidence that leads you to realize, see or “hear”
messages. Certain words standing out in a newspaper or magazine,
words of a song that bring messages, something special noticed in a
photo or other image, etc. Pay attention to these messages and allow
themtoinspireyoutoconnectwithwhateverandwhoeverisguiding
you. Aspects of personality can erupt, at appropriate or sometimes
inappropriate moments. How much is true in this situation and how
much is made-up or imagined?
Keywords: Spiritual channeling. A need to free up “stuck” or
earthbound entities. Efforts to materialize things. Coming straight
out with things. Giving voice to spirit. Tarot readings, clairvoyance
andclairsentience.Thingsseenaheadoftheirtime.Bringingmessages
from the other side. Contacting the dead.
The Caution: Putting on a false front. Merely doing a performance
for others. Making things up. Using mind control over others to get
a desired outcome. Using sensational methods to induce others to
give up control over their own lives. Exorcisms performed by the
inexperienced. Inviting weird energies or people.
Pisces 23
Be careful of your thoughts;
they may become words at any
moment.
Lara Gassen
The act of contemplation
creates the thing contemplated.
Isaac D’Israeli
Only he who can see the
invisible can do the impossible.
Frank Gaines
I am an invisible man.No,I am
not a spook like those who
haunted Edgar Allen Poe nor
am I one of your Hollywood-
movie ectoplasms.I am a man
of substance,of flesh and bone,
fiber and liquids—and I might
even be said to possess a mind.
I am invisible,simply because
people refuse to see me.
Ralph Ellison
Faith is power to believe and
power to see.
Prentice Mulford
What does mysticism really
mean? It means the way to
attain knowledge.It’s close
to philosophy,except in
philosophy you go horizontally
while in mysticism you go
vertically.
ElieWiesel

<<<PAGE 377>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
354
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE TINY ISLAND SEEMS LOST IN
THE BROAD OCEAN,BUT ITS HAPPY
INHABITANTS HAVE CREATED A
WORLD ALL THEIR OWN
Commentary: ‘The Tiny Island’ shows a tiny speck of territory in
amongst the ‘Broad Ocean’. It implies a small area of people living
together.'ItsHappyInhabitantsHaveCreatedaWorldAllTheirOwn’;
they have created their own happiness on this somewhat isolated
piece of turf. They have carved their life together, but as this is a
‘Tiny Island’, there’s a need for compromise in order to sustain good
community relations.
Oracle: There are issues of having to learn to get along with people.
Drawn together by similar circumstances, hopes or ambitions, it is
ironic that sometimes compromise, for the sake of agreement, is the
only way to successful coexistence. There is a clear boundary within
whicheveryoneconcernedmustbeconsidered.Thiscanleadtoalack
ofprivacyorintimateexchangesbetweenpeople.Toleaveanyoneout
canleadtodivisionsandproblemsofterritoryand/orpossessions.To
include others can bring other problems. Issues of territory and one’s
space will come up eventually. The positive aspect of the ‘Island’ is
that you can have clear boundaries and expand your energies into
your space. This may be about family, a work situation, or it may take
in your whole world. The key is to adapt, consider others and use the
available energies in the situation to create something worthwhile.
Celebrateeachotherratherthandiminishthemfortheirindividuality.
However, too many people living closely together can lead to feeling
like you’re living on “main street”, with some not being able to just
hangoutandletloose.Havingpeopledroppingincanbepleasurable
and fun or it can be compromising, as time, space and privacy are
lost. Do the same people turn up in your life again and again? Who
are you comfortable sharing your space with? Who would you share
yourdesertislandwith?Whatpossessionswouldyoutakeifyoucould
only take a few?
Keywords:Adaptabilityandcohabitation.Peoplejammedin.Seeking
others of like mind. Knowing a lot of people. Always considering
others. Noise and light pollution. Feeling like new blood is needed in
ordertogrowandflourish.Coexistence.Apartments.Livingtogether.
People moving in.
The Caution: Cutting off from those around. Not having enough
privacy—orspace.Thingsbeingkepttoo“allinthefamily”.Nochance
to be alone. Pollution and garbage. Crowding out people. Loneliness
even amongst many. Being deserted and lost.
Pisces 24
No man is an Island,entire of
itself;every man is a piece of the
Continent,a part of the main;if
a clod be washed away by the
sea,Europe is the less,as well
as if a promontory were,as well
as if a manor of thy friends or
of thine own were;any man’s
death diminishes me,because
I am involved in Mankind;And
therefore never send to know
for whom the bell tolls;It tolls
for thee.
John Donne
How I wish that somewhere
there existed an island for those
who are wise and of good will.
Albert Einstein
In a sense,each of us is an island.
In another sense,however,we
are all one.For though islands
appear separate,and may even
be situated at great distances
from one another,they are only
extrusions of the same planet,
earth.
J.DonaldWalters
Why are they called apartments
when they are all stuck
together?
Anon

<<<PAGE 378>>>
PISCES
W
355
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
THE PURGING OF THE PRIESTHOOD
Commentary: ‘The Purging of the Priesthood’ is an image
of people having to measure up to spiritual or moral values.
Whoever upholds a position in the ‘Priesthood’ should act in an
appropriate manner and minister to the needs of people without
any ulterior motives. When people don’t live up to their duties
or the expectations of others, it often leads to someone having
to leave, retire, resign or be ejected. ‘Purging’ means to get rid
of and it can lead to scapegoats: those that are thrown into the
desert, abandoned and forgotten.
Oracle: Periodically, there is a need to cleanse and purify motives,
leading to a better representation of moral and spiritual values.
Sometimes we need to reexamine moral and spiritual sincerity
in a person, corporation, community or situation. Getting rid
of people or ideals that hold one back can open up situations
to more trust, sharing and enjoyment. You may have to dismiss
someone, or a group of people, from their duties or from their
ability to affect your life in some way. It is easy to lose sight of the
ideal through the use of the rationalizing mind, the ego, security
issues or emotive passion. However, if someone has not lived
up to their responsibilities on some level, often it’s best for the
future, and one’s peace of mind, to be free of them. It may lead
to a breakthrough in the understanding of where they’ve gone
“off the rails”, as well. Sometimes there’s a need to get clearly out
of the reach of people’s “influence”. People who hold ‘Priestly’
attitudes often have quite a lot of power and hold on others.
People will often give them power, thereby forsaking their own
powers in the process. What side of this ‘Purging’ are you on?
Are you the one with the “right” motives? There could be a fear
of rejection at work. Whatever your situation, stating your truth
and staying with it is the best option.
Keywords: Revealing the truth of people for who and what they
truly are. Cutting people off. Throwing out things that don’t
measure up. Forced retirement and redundancies. Payouts at the
end of employment. Dismissals. Opting out for moral reasons.
Being fired. Holes left where someone took up a lot of space.
TheCaution: Stressful battle over who’s in charge. Blackmail. The
threat of being thrown out. Something being revealed. Evicting
people because they deceive, lie or mislead or just because
they’re not liked. Bringing somebody down. Scapegoating
others. Corruption and scandal that threaten collapse. Wanting
to appear to be doing the right thing. Coverups. The burning of
books. Perversion.
Pisces 25
Sometimes you’ve got to
let everything go—purge
yourself.If you are unhappy
with anything ...whatever is
bringing you down,get rid of it.
Because you’ll find that when
you’re free,your true creativity,
your true self comes out.
TinaTurner
It has been my experience that
folks who have no vices have
very few virtues.
Abraham Lincoln
A priest is a man who is called
Father by everyone except his
own children who are obliged
to call him Uncle.
Italian Proverb
Whoever undertakes to set
himself up as a judge in the
field of truth and knowledge is
shipwrecked by the laughter of
the Gods.
Albert Einstein
The heresies we should fear are
those which can be confused
with orthodoxy.
Jorge Luis Borges
Faith is not a thing which one
“loses,”we merely cease to
shape our lives by it.
Georges Bernanos
He that serves at the altar
ought to live by the altar.
Romanian Proverb

<<<PAGE 379>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
356
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A NEW MOON REVEALS THAT IT’S
TIME FOR PEOPLE TO GO AHEAD
WITH THEIR DIFFERENT PROJECTS
Commentary: ‘A New Moon Reveals That it’s Time For People to Go
Ahead With Their Different Projects’ shows the realization of a new
time dawning; there’s a new beginning. Each month, at the ‘New
Moon’, there is the necessary energy and impetus to get new things
started. It is conventionally a time to put energy into anything new
in your life, as it will have forward momentum.
Oracle: There’s an image here of the emergence of new possibilities
and new horizons. This Symbol can imply a moving away from or
a splitting up of people, however this may not always be the case.
There could be a call for a couple to split off from the rest of the
family, or somebody might need some space to be alone or get on
with something they want or need to do. Hence it doesn’t always
mean a split or separation, although it certainly can. People have
their own responses to situations, so it is important not to expect
everyone to react in the same way when something unexpected,
or new, comes up. Periodically, there is a need to let things go from
the past. Relationships, jobs, friendships; in fact any situation at all
mightbecomingtocompletion,orneedingabreakforawhile.There
can be the feeling of a dividing wall coming up between you and
others.Thissituationmayhavebeenbrewingforsometimeandnow
the consequences of it are coming to light. However, if people are
given their own measure of freedom, they may come back together
when the time and the energy is right. Perhaps it’s a good idea to
direct some energy into a new project at the time of the next ‘New
Moon’. Light a candle and state your intentions with honesty and
feel the effects of the rewards that can come flooding in with this
new beginning. Remember to honor “the other”, the other person
who may have their own ‘Project’ or path to follow.
Keywords: Diversifying. Applying talents in a different direction.
People splitting up and splitting off. New opportunities and
potentials. The beginning of a new age. Letting go of the old and
outworn. Separations. Embracing one’s future without the need for
others. Coming to a fork in the road. Divorces. New jobs, directions
and destinies. The dawning of a new era.
The Caution: Not giving, or receiving emotional support. Feeling
split off and alone, even when one is with others. The fear and
loathing of possible separation. Overthrowing the old too quickly.
Changing direction unexpectedly. The fear of old age. Relationships
that fail again and again.
Pisces 26
A person needs at intervals to
separate himself from family
and companions and go to new
places.He must go without his
familiars in order to be open to
influences,to change.
Katharine Butler Hathaway
O,swear not by the moon,th’
inconstant moon,That monthly
changes in her circled orb,Lest
that thy love prove likewise
variable.
William Shakespeare
Although the connections are
not always obvious,personal
change is inseparable from
social and political change.
Harriet Lerner
Separation secures manifest
friendship.
Indian Proverb
The difference between divorce
and legal separation is that
a legal separation gives a
husband time to hide his
money.
Johnny Carson
There is a star above us which
unites souls of the first order,
though worlds and ages
separate them.
Christina of Sweden
We must change in order to
survive.
Pearl Bailey

<<<PAGE 380>>>
PISCES
W
357
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A HARVEST MOON ILLUMINATES
THE SKY
Commentary: ‘A Harvest Moon Illuminates the Sky’. This is an
extraordinary Symbol, considering the fact that these Symbols
came through the clairvoyant, Elsie Wheeler, in random order.
It’s extraordinary because the ‘Harvest Moon’ can very easily
fall on this degree, as the ‘Harvest Moon’ is calculated as the full
moon occurring nearest to the autumnal equinox in the northern
hemisphere, about September 23. On several nights in succession,
at this time of the year, the moonrise is at nearly the same time,
because of the relation of the moon’s path to the horizon. On
these nights, there is full moonlight almost from sunset to sunrise
if the sky is unclouded.
Oracle: This Symbol shows an abundant time of ‘Harvest’. The
‘Harvest Moon’ is a positive sign, with high energy abounding.
The sky is clear and conditions are perfect. It’s a time of fertility
and abundance, but it is also a sign that there may still be much
work to be done. For now, although this can be an opportunity to
relax, enjoy, and to conserve strength in anticipation of the tasks
ahead. For the time being, you can reap the benefits of the work
that’s been accomplished so far. There can be strong feelings of
culmination, fertility and fullness. You may feel that it has taken
a while to get where you are, and this is a good chance to take
some time out to celebrate and reconnect with family and loved
ones. Capture this magical moment whilst it lasts, as the energy
may start to wane before you know it. However, while it is great
now to celebrate the achievements of the ‘Harvest’, it is also a
time of self-discipline because the task must be completed or
the fruits of one’s labors may go rotten or be wasted. Be sure
not to get so carried away in the celebration that you neglect
finishing the tasks before you. With all of this light ‘Illuminating’
the night ‘Sky’, take a look around with open eyes and see what
can be seen.
Keywords: Situations that are very ripe and full of fruition.
Celebrating what you have. Expanded perspective making
everything clear. A sense of achievement. Seizing the moment
to make the most of what’s possible. Nature’s bounty. The beauty
of the moon in the night sky.
The Caution: Neglecting the tasks at hand because of the
appearance of abundance. Achievements waning because of
neglect. Wasting energy on inconsequential activities. "Lunatic"
behaviour. Not being able to sleep.
Pisces 27
Sow a thought,reap an action;
sow an action,reap a habit;sow
a habit,reap a character;sow a
character;reap a destiny.
Anon
Sow much,reap much;sow little,
reap little.
Chinese Proverb
Give fools their gold,and
knaves their power;Let fortune’s
bubbles rise and fall;Who sows a
field,or trains a flower,Or plants
a tree,is more than all.
John GreenleafWhittier
Under the harvest moon,When
the soft silver Drips shimmering
Over the garden nights,Death,
the gray mocker,Comes and
whispers to you As a beautiful
friendWho remembers.
Carl Sandburg
Write your wishes on the door
and come in.Stand outside in
the pools of the harvest moon.
Carl Sandburg
Talk unbelief,and you will have
unbelief;but talk faith,and you
will have faith.According to the
seed sown will be the harvest.
Ellen G.White
Everyone is a moon,and has a
dark side which he never shows
anyone.
MarkTwain

<<<PAGE 381>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
358
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A FERTILE GARDEN UNDER THE
FULL MOON
Commentary: The symbol, ‘A Fertile Garden Under the Full
Moon’ is a vital, alive and positive picture. This is a very powerful
image of the Goddess energy. Not only is it the ‘Fertile Garden’
of creativity and growing life, but also the gentle light and water
energy of ‘The Full Moon’ is radiating energy through it.
Oracle: The “tidal” effect of the ‘Full Moon’ on the emotional
“waters” in this moment are raising feelings high and creating a
strong sense of satisfaction, all under the blessing of the ‘Moon’s’
strong feminine energy. There’s a sense that one has all that’s
needed, and emotions are running at full tilt. The ‘Garden’ is
‘Fertile’ and full of produce, vegetables, apples, flowers and plants
of all descriptions. It may be time for the harvesting of the fruits of
your efforts and there may be a need for more fertilization soon,
but right now you can enjoy the fullness of this time. As there’s
so much ‘Fertile’ energy around, this is a situation brimming with
rewards and opportunities for new life. Enjoy the moment and
try to keep a sense of equilibrium, though, as soon the energy
will be on the wane and you’ll have to get back to more practical,
everyday tasks. However, there can also be the sense that one
is at the peak of some experience and at any moment it could
all slide away. The time of the ‘Full Moon’ is a time when the
male and female energies are at their greatest polarity, with the
Sun, representing male energies, and the ‘Moon’, the feminine
aspect, being in opposition to each other in the sky. If there’s a
rift between people, it may be time to reflect on what’s causing
it. Don’t feel that your opportunities for happiness have passed.
‘Fertile’ periods come in cycles, and it is likely that another
opportunity will come soon. In the meantime, carry on with
everyday tasks and prepare for the next ‘Fertile’ stage.
Keywords: Fullness and fertility. Peak of energy and experiences.
Brilliantly active unconscious life. Cycles. Waiting for the right
time to approach or handle a situation. The effect of the moon.
Astrology and predictive practices. The time for harvesting the
rewards of hard work. Nature sprites. Vegetables, herbs and
nature's bounty.
TheCaution: Jealous protection of possessions. Not being able to
make one’s mind up because of the number of possibilities. Missed
opportunities. Difficulty shutting down the mind. Emotions that
get out of hand.
Pisces 28
The first farmer was the first
man,and all historic nobility
rests on possession and use of
land.
RalphWaldo Emerson
A moon garden is one which
is filled with white-flowering
plants that catch the moonlight
and awaken the moon faeries.
Only white blossoms are able
to capture and reflect the pale
light cast by a moonbeam.
Dubh Sidhe
Ever since man began to till
the soil and learned not to eat
the seed grain but to plant it
and wait for the harvest,the
postponement of gratification
has been the basis of a
higher standard of living and
civilization.
S.I.Hayakawa
It’s the opinion of some that
crops could be grown on the
moon.Which raises the fear
that it may not be long before
we’re paying somebody not to.
Franklin P.Jones
Ignorance is the night of the
mind,but a night without moon
and star.
Confucius
A mind without instruction can
no more bear fruit than can a
field,however fertile,without
cultivation.
Cicero

<<<PAGE 382>>>
PISCES
W
359
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
LIGHT BREAKING INTO MANY
COLORS AS IT PASSES THROUGH A
PRISM
Commentary: ‘Light Breaking into Many Colors as it Passes
Through a Prism’ is an image of beauty and shape. A ‘Prism’ in
optics is a piece of translucent glass or crystal that is used to
form a spectrum of light that is separated according to colors.
The light becomes separated because different wavelengths or
frequencies are bent by different amounts as they enter the prism
and again as they leave it. The shorter wavelengths, toward the
blue or violet end of the spectrum, are refracted by the greatest
amount; the longer wavelengths, towards the red end, are
refracted the least.
Oracle: You may need to break your situation down into its
simpler components in order to see the full picture. Even
though there are complex things that need to be broken down
to their elemental parts, it is not as difficult as it might seem.
This is vital to the success of the situation, and will lead to a
greater understanding of the relationship between the many
parts. Just be careful not to overanalyze, thereby losing the joy
that’s inherent. This Symbol can also indicate that you are of a
curious nature, or perhaps just have a natural capacity for probing
into complexities and learning about the makeup of an object,
situation or a person. This can, on one hand, make for a constant
fascination with the connectedness and the larger questions of
life. However, be aware that an emphasis on pulling things apart,
and continual analysis can lead to disappointment; the various
elements may be somehow less exciting than the whole. This
Symbol is encouraging you to take a single vision and develop
it into its many possible individual streams. Color may indeed
have a part to play, as can symbols and images. Hang a crystal in
the window to attract the rays of the sun. This can bring some
glorious energy your way.
Keywords: Spectrum analysis. Color and crystal healing.
Rainbows. Light refraction. Side effects. Considering many
facets of a situation. Endless opportunities. Optics. Sight. Seeing.
Copying and sharing ideas or things. Disseminating information.
Auras and aura photography. Triangles. Polarization of light.
Reflection. Laboratory tests. Diffracted personality.
The Caution: Locked in to a set of parameters. Over analyzing
things. Being blinded by ambition. Daunted by the task ahead.
Mirages. Microscopes and binoculars but not seeing things as
they really are.
Pisces 29
An optimist is a person who
sees a green light everywhere,
while a pessimist sees only the
red stoplight…The truly wise
person is colorblind.
Albert Schweitzer
Nothing has such power to
broaden the mind as the ability
to investigate systematically
and truly all that comes under
thy observation in life.
MarcusTuileries
It’s a good thing that when God
created the rainbow,He didn’t
consult a decorator or He would
still be picking colors.
Sam Levenson
The purest and most thoughtful
minds are those which love
color the most.
John Ruskin
…daydreams,as it were… I
look out the window sometimes
to seek the color of the shadows
and the different greens in the
trees,but when I get ready to
paint I just close my eyes and
imagine a scene.
Grandma Moses
All colors are the friends of their
neighbors and the lovers of
their opposites.
Marc Chagall

<<<PAGE 383>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
W
360
What does this SYMBOL say to you?
A MAJESTIC ROCK FORMATION
RESEMBLING A FACE IS IDEALIZED
BY A BOY WHO TAKES IT AS HIS
IDEAL OF GREATNESS,AS HE
GROWS UP,HE BEGINS TO LOOK
LIKE IT
Commentary: ‘A Majestic Rock Formation Resembling a Face is
Idealized by a Boy Who Takes it as His Ideal of Greatness, ‘As He
Grows Up, He Begins to Look Like It’ shows the ability that we
have of projecting an ideal or an image into the future. This can
be an image of what, or who, we’d like to become. We can then
grow and emerge into that reality.
Oracle: Sometimes we see an image of ourselves that we’d like
to emulate or aspire to or become. It’s good to have a goal in life,
something we can inspire us, and something to work towards.
Truly in this life, we can set our sights high and aim for them,
as did the ‘Boy’ who looked on the ‘Majestic Rock Formation’ as
‘His Ideal of Greatness’. Having an ‘Ideal’ of how we’d like to be
can be great, as long as we aren’t trying to be something that we
naturally or intrinsically are not possible of being. What is that
you ‘Idealize’? What is it that you’d like to project? What image
suits the real person inside of you? You may find that you are
growing into the ‘Ideal’ that you have imagined and it gives you
a sense of pride and fulfillment, assuming you have imagined a
positive image. Meditating on a goal or the projection of an ideal
can lead to actuality, just be clear about what you really desire
in the situation—you just might get it!
Keywords: Concrete manifestation of one’s ideals. Enduring
truths. Culmination of efforts. Projections of ideal images.
Wanting to be “big” and successful. Tutankhamen’s mask. Wanting
a sense of immortality. Defining one’s fate through conscious
manifestation. Morphing reality to suit an objective. Ambition.
The ability to see life in inanimate objects.
The Caution: Not being at all clear about whom one is or what
one can be. Becoming a screen for the projection of other’s ideals.
Stony faces that show the hardships of life. Hardening of one’s
personality. Stony faces. Idealizing others therefore losing one's
own identity.
Pisces 30
I always wanted to be someone,
but I should have been more
specific.
LilyTomlin
Life is a quarry,out of which
we are to mold and chisel and
complete a character.
Goethe
We are what we pretend to be,
so we must be careful what we
pretend to be.
KurtVonnegut
For a man to achieve all that
is demanded of him he must
regard himself as greater than
he is.You must see your goals
clearly and specifically before
you can set out for them.Hold
them in your mind until they
become second nature.
Les Brown
Ordinary people believe only
in the possible.Extraordinary
people visualize not what
is possible or probable,but
rather what is impossible.And
by visualizing the impossible,
they begin to see it as possible.
Cherie Carter-Scott
I guess it proves that in America
anyone can be.
President Gerald Ford
(Referring to his own
appointment as President)

<<<PAGE 384>>>
Appendix A:Birthday Tables
361
January
February
March
April
1
10–12 Cap
1
12–14 Aqu
1
10–12 Pis
1
11–13 Ari
2
11–13 Cap
2
13–15 Aqu
2
11–13 Pis
2
12–14 Ari
3
12–14 Cap
3
14–16 Aqu
3
12–14 Pis
3
13–15 Ari
4
13–15 Cap
4
15–17 Aqu
4
13–15 Pis
4
14–16 Ari
5
14–16 Cap
5
16–18 Aqu
5
14–16 Pis
5
15–17 Ari
6
15–17 Cap
6
17–19 Aqu
6
15–17 Pis
6
16–18 Ari
7
16–18 Cap
7
18–20 Aqu
7
16–18 Pis
7
17–19 Ari
8
17–19 Cap
8
19–21 Aqu
8
17–19 Pis
8
18–20 Ari
9
18–20 Cap
9
20–22 Aqu
9
18–20 Pis
9
19–21 Ari
10
19–21 Cap
10
21–23 Aqu
10
19–21 Pis
10
20–22 Ari
11
20–22 Cap
11
22–24  Aqu
11
20–22 Pis
11
21–23 Ari
12
21–23 Cap
12
23–25 Aqu
12
21–23 Pis
12
22–24 Ari
13
22–24 Cap
13
24–26 Aqu
13
22–24 Pis
13
23–25 Ari
14
23–25 Cap
14
25–27 Aqu
14
23–25 Pis
14
24–26 Ari
15
24–26 Cap
15
26–28 Aqu
15
24–26 Pis
15
25–27 Ari
16
25–27 Cap
16
27–29 Aqu
16
25–27 Pis
16
26–28 Ari
17
26–28 Cap
17
28–30 Aqu
17
26–28 Pis
17
27–29 Ari
18
27–29 Cap
18
29 Aqu–1 Pis
18
27–29 Pis
18
28–30 Ari
19
29 Cap–1 Aqu
19
30 Aqu–2 Pis
19
28–30 Pis
19
29 Ari–1 Tau
20
30 Cap–2 Aqu
20
1–3 Pis
20
29 Pis–1 Ari
20
30 Ari–2 Tau
21
1–3 Aqu
21
2–4 Pis
21
30 Pis–2 Ari
21
1–3 Tau
22
2–4 Aqu
22
3–5 Pis
22
1–3 Ari
22
1–3 Tau
23
3–5 Aqu
23
4–6 Pis
23
2–4 Ari
23
2–4 Tau
24
4–6 Aqu
24
5–7 Pis
24
3–5 Ari
24
3–5 Tau
25
5–7 Aqu
25
6–8 Pis
25
4–6 Ari
25
4–6 Tau
26
6–8 Aqu
26
7–9 Pis
26
5–7 Ari
26
5–7 Tau
27
7–9 Aqu
27
8–10 Pis
27
6–8 Ari
27
6–8 Tau
28
8–10 Aqu
28
9–11 Pis
28
7–9 Ari
28
7–9 Tau
29
9–11 Aqu
29
8–10 Ari
29
8–10 Tau
30
10–12 Aqu
30
9–11Ari
30
9–11Tau
31
11–13 Aqu
31
10–12 Ari
May
June
July
August
1
10–12 Tau
1
10–12 Gem
1
9–11 Can
1
8–10 Leo
2
11–13 Tau
2
11–13 Gem
2
10–12 Can
2
9–11 Leo
3
12–14 Tau
3
12–14 Gem
3
11–13 Can
3
10–12 Leo
4
13–15 Tau
4
13–15 Gem
4
12–14 Can
4
11–13 Leo
5
14–16 Tau
5
14–12 Gem
5
13–15 Can
5
12–14 Leo
6
15–17 Tau
6
15–16 Gem
6
14–16 Can
6
13–15 Leo
7
16–18 Tau
7
16–17 Gem
7
14–16 Can
7
14–16 Leo
8
17–19 Tau
8
17–18 Gem
8
15–17 Can
8
15–17 Leo
9
18–20 Tau
9
18–19 Gem
9
16–18 Can
9
16–18 Leo
10
19–21 Tau
10
19–20 Gem
10
17–19 Can
10
17–19 Leo
11
20–22 Tau
11
20–22 Gem
11
18–20 Can
11
18–20 Leo
12
21–23 Tau
12
21–23 Gem
12
19–21 Can
12
19–21 Leo
13
22–24 Tau
13
22–24 Gem
13
20–22 Can
13
20–22 Leo
14
23–25 Tau
14
23–25 Gem
14
21–23 Can
14
21–23 Leo
15
24–26 Tau
15
24–26 Gem
15
22–24 Can
15
22–24 Leo
16
25–27 Tau
16
24–26 Gem
16
23–25 Can
16
23–25 Leo
17
26–28 Tau
17
25–27 Gem
17
24–26 Can
17
24–26 Leo
18
27–29 Tau
18
26–28 Gem
18
25–27 Can
18
25–27 Leo
19
28–30 Tau
19
27–29 Gem
19
26–28 Can
19
26–28 Leo
20
29 Tau –1 Gem
20
28–30 Gem
20
27–29 Can
20
27–29 Leo
21
30 Tau –2 Gem
21
29 Gem–1 Can
21
28–30 Can
21
28–30 Leo
22
1–3 Gem
22
30 Gem –2 Can
22
29 Can–1 Leo
22
29 Leo–1 Vir
23
1–3 Gem
23
1–3 Can
23
30 Can–2 Leo
23
29 Leo–1 Vir
24
2–4 Gem
24
2–4 Can
24
1–3 Leo
24
30 Leo–2 Vir
25
3–5 Gem
25
3–5 Can
25
2–4 Leo
25
1–3 Vir
26
4–6 Gem
26
4–6 Can
26
3–5 Leo
26
2–4 Vir
27
5–7 Gem
27
5–7 Can
27
4–6 Leo
27
3–5 Vir
28
6–8 Gem
28
6–8 Can
28
5–7 Leo
28
4–6 Vir
29
7–9 Gem
29
7–9 Can
29
5–7 Leo
29
5–7 Vir
30
8–10 Gem
30
8–10 Can
30
6–8 Leo
30
6–8 Vir
31
9–11 Gem
31
7–9 Leo
31
7–9 Vir

<<<PAGE 385>>>
SABIAN SYMBOLS
362
Septermber
October
November
December
1
8–10 Vir
1
7–9 Lib
1
8–10 Sco
1
8–10 Sag
2
9–11 Vir
2
8–10 Lib
2
9–11 Sco
2
9–11 Sag
3
10–12 Vir
3
9–11 Lib
3
10–12 Sco
3
10–12 Sag
4
11–13 Vir
4
10–12 Lib
4
11–13 Sco
4
11–13 Sag
5
12–14 Vir
5
11–13 Lib
5
12–14 Sco
5
12–14 Sag
6
13–15 Vir
6
12–14 Lib
6
13–15 Sco
6
13–15 Sag
7
14–16 Vir
7
13–15 Lib
7
14–16 Sco
7
14–16 Sag
8
15–17 Vir
8
14–16 Lib
8
15–17 Sco
8
16–18 Sag
9
16–18 Vir
9
15–17 Lib
9
16–18 Sco
9
17–19 Sag
10
17–19 Vir
10
16–18 Lib
10
17–19 Sco
10
18–20 Sag
11
18–20 Vir
11
17–19 Lib
11
18–20 Sco
11
19–21 Sag
12
19–21 Vir
12
18–20 Lib
12
19–21 Sco
12
20–22 Sag
13
20–22 Vir
13
19–21 Lib
13
20–22 Sco
13
21–23 Sag
14
21–23 Vir
14
20–22 Lib
14
21–23 Sco
14
22–24 Sag
15
22–24 Vir
15
21–23 Lib
15
22–24 Sco
15
23–25 Sag
16
23–25 Vir
16
22–24 Lib
16
23–25 Sco
16
24–26 Sag
17
24–26 Vir
17
23–25 Lib
17
24–26 Sco
17
25–27 Sag
18
25–27 Vir
18
24–26 Lib
18
25–27 Sco
18
26–28 Sag
19
26–28 Vir
19
25–27 Lib
19
26–28 Sco
19
27–29 Sag
20
27–29 Vir
20
26–28 Lib
20
27–29 Sco
20
28–30 Sag
21
28–30 Vir
21
27–29 Lib
21
28–30 Sco
21
29 Sag–1 Cap
22
29 Vir–1 Lib
22
28–30 Lib
22
29 Sco–1 Sag
22
30 Sag–2 Cap
23
30 Vir–2 Lib
23
29 Lib–1 Sco
23
30 Sco–2 Sag
23
1–3 Cap
24
1–3 Lib
24
30 Lib–2 Sco
24
1–3 Sag
24
2–4 Cap
25
2–4 Lib
25
1–3 Sco
25
2–4 Sag
25
3–5 Cap
26
3–5 Lib
26
2–4 Sco
26
3–5 Sag
26
4–6 Cap
27
3–5 Lib
27
3–5 Sco
27
4–6 Sag
27
5–7 Cap
28
4–6 Lib
28
4–6 Sco
28
5–7 Sag
28
6–8 Cap
29
5–7 Lib
29
5–7 Sco
29
6–8 Sag
29
7–9 Cap
30
6–8 Lib
30
6–8 Sco
30
7–9 Sag
30
8–10 Cap
31
7–9 Sco
31
9–11 Cap
Leap Year
January
February
March
April
1
9–11 Cap
1
11–13 Aqu
1
10–12 Pis
1
11–13 Ari
2
10–12 Cap
2
12–14 Aqu
2
11–13 Pis
2
12–14 Ari
3
11–13 Cap
3
13–15 Aqu
3
12–14 Pis
3
13–15 Ari
4
12–14 Cap
4
14–16 Aqu
4
13–15 Pis
4
14–16 Ari
5
13–15 Cap
5
15–17 Aqu
5
14–16 Pis
5
15–17 Ari
6
14–16 Cap
6
16–18 Aqu
6
15–17 Pis
6
16–18 Ari
7
15–17 Cap
7
17–19 Aqu
7
16–18 Pis
7
17–19 Ari
8
16–18 Cap
8
18–20 Aqu
8
17–19 Pis
8
18–20 Ari
9
17–19 Cap
9
19–21 Aqu
9
18–20 Pis
9
19–21 Ari
10
18–20 Cap
10
20–22 Aqu
10
19–21 Pis
10
20–22 Ari
11
19–21 Cap
11
21–23 Aqu
11
20–22 Pis
11
21–23 Ari
12
20–22 Cap
12
22–24  Aqu
12
21–23 Pis
12
22–24 Ari
13
21–23 Cap
13
23–25 Aqu
13
22–24 Pis
13
23–25 Ari
14
22–24 Cap
14
24–26 Aqu
14
23–25 Pis
14
24–26 Ari
15
23–25 Cap
15
25–27 Aqu
15
24–26 Pis
15
25–27 Ari
16
24–26 Cap
16
26–28 Aqu
16
25–27 Pis
16
26–28 Ari
17
25–27 Cap
17
27–29 Aqu
17
26–28 Pis
17
27–29 Ari
18
26–28 Cap
18
28–30 Aqu
18
27–29 Pis
18
28–30 Ari
19
27–29 Cap
19
29 Aqu–1 Pis
19
28–30 Pis
19
29 Ari–1 Tau
20
29 Cap–1 Aqu
20
30 Aqu–2 Pis
20
29 Pis–1 Ari
20
30 Ari–2 Tau
21
30 Cap–2 Aqu
21
1–3 Pis
21
30 Pis–2 Ari
21
1–3 Tau
22
1–3 Aqu
22
2–4 Pis
22
1–3 Ari
22
2–4 Tau
23
2–4 Aqu
23
3–5 Pis
23
2–4 Ari
23
3–5 Tau
24
3–5 Aqu
24
4–6 Pis
24
3–5 Ari
24
4–6 Tau
25
4–6 Aqu
25
5–7 Pis
25
4–6 Ari
25
5–7 Tau
26
5–7 Aqu
26
6–8 Pis
26
5–7 Ari
26
6–8 Tau
27
6–8 Aqu
27
7–9 Pis
27
6–8 Ari
27
7–9 Tau
28
7–9 Aqu
28
8–10 Pis
28
7–9 Ari
28
8–10 Tau
29
8–10 Aqu
29
9–11 Pis
29
8–10 Ari
29
9–11Tau
30
9–11 Aqu
30
9–11Ari
30
9–11Tau
31
10–12 Aqu
31
10–12 Ari

<<<PAGE 386>>>
Appendix A:Birthday Tables
363
May
June
July
August
1
10–12 Tau
1
10–12 Gem
1
9–11 Can
1
9–11 Leo
2
11–13 Tau
2
11–13 Gem
2
10–12 Can
2
10–12 Leo
3
12–14 Tau
3
12–14 Gem
3
11–13 Can
3
11–13 Leo
4
13–15 Tau
4
13–15 Gem
4
12–14 Can
4
11–13 Leo
5
14–16 Tau
5
14–12 Gem
5
13–15 Can
5
12–14 Leo
6
15–17 Tau
6
15–16 Gem
6
14–16 Can
6
13–15 Leo
7
16–18 Tau
7
16–17 Gem
7
15–17 Can
7
14–16 Leo
8
17–19 Tau
8
17–18 Gem
8
16–18 Can
8
15–17 Leo
9
18–20 Tau
9
18–19 Gem
9
17–19 Can
9
16–18 Leo
10
19–21 Tau
10
19–20 Gem
10
18–20 Can
10
17–19 Leo
11
20–22 Tau
11
20–22 Gem
11
19–21 Can
11
18–20 Leo
12
21–23 Tau
12
21–23 Gem
12
19–21 Can
12
19–21 Leo
13
22–24 Tau
13
22–24 Gem
13
20–22 Can
13
20–22 Leo
14
23–25 Tau
14
23–25 Gem
14
21–23 Can
14
21–23 Leo
15
24–26 Tau
15
24–26 Gem
15
22–24 Can
15
22–24 Leo
16
25–27 Tau
16
25–27 Gem
16
23–25 Can
16
23–25 Leo
17
26–28 Tau
17
26–28 Gem
17
24–26 Can
17
24–26 Leo
18
27–29 Tau
18
27–29 Gem
18
25–27 Can
18
25–27 Leo
19
28–30 Tau
19
28–30 Gem
19
26–28 Can
19
26–28 Leo
20
29 Tau –1 Gem
20
29 Gem–1 Can
20
27–29 Can
20
27–29 Leo
21
30 Tau –2 Gem
21
29 Gem–1 Can
21
28–30 Can
21
28–30 Leo
22
1–3 Gem
22
30 Gem –2 Can
22
29 Can–1 Leo
22
29 Leo–1 Vir
23
2–4 Gem
23
1–3 Can
23
30 Can–2 Leo
23
30 Leo–2 Vir
24
3–5 Gem
24
2–4 Can
24
1–3 Leo
24
1–3 Vir
25
4–6 Gem
25
3–5 Can
25
2–4 Leo
25
2–4 Vir
26
5–7 Gem
26
4–6 Can
26
3–5 Leo
26
3–5 Vir
27
6–8 Gem
27
5–7 Can
27
4–6 Leo
27
4–6 Vir
28
7–9 Gem
28
6–8 Can
28
5–7 Leo
28
5–7 Vir
29
7–9 Gem
29
7–9 Can
29
6–8 Leo
29
6–8 Vir
30
8–10 Gem
30
8–10 Can
30
7–9 Leo
30
6–8 Vir
31
9–11 Gem
31
8–9 Leo
31
7–9 Vir
Septermber
October
November
December
1
8–10 Vir
1
8–10 Lib
1
8–10 Sco
1
9–11 Sag
2
9–11 Vir
2
9–11 Lib
2
9–11 Sco
2
10–12 Sag
3
10–12 Vir
3
10–12 Lib
3
10–12 Sco
3
11–13 Sag
4
11–13 Vir
4
11–13 Lib
4
11–13 Sco
4
12–14 Sag
5
12–14 Vir
5
12–14 Lib
5
12–14 Sco
5
13–15 Sag
6
13–15 Vir
6
13–15 Lib
6
13–15 Sco
6
14–16 Sag
7
14–16 Vir
7
14–16 Lib
7
14–16 Sco
7
15–17 Sag
8
15–17 Vir
8
15–17 Lib
8
15–17 Sco
8
16–18 Sag
9
16–18 Vir
9
16–18 Lib
9
16–18 Sco
9
17–19 Sag
10
17–19 Vir
10
17–19 Lib
10
17–19 Sco
10
18–20 Sag
11
18–20 Vir
11
18–20 Lib
11
18–20 Sco
11
19–21 Sag
12
19–21 Vir
12
19–21 Lib
12
19–21 Sco
12
20–22 Sag
13
20–22 Vir
13
20–22 Lib
13
20–22 Sco
13
21–23 Sag
14
21–23 Vir
14
20–22 Lib
14
21–23 Sco
14
22–24 Sag
15
22–24 Vir
15
21–23 Lib
15
22–24 Sco
15
23–25 Sag
16
23–25 Vir
16
22–24 Lib
16
23–25 Sco
16
24–26 Sag
17
24–26 Vir
17
23–25 Lib
17
24–26 Sco
17
25–27 Sag
18
25–27 Vir
18
24–26 Lib
18
25–27 Sco
18
26–28 Sag
19
26–28 Vir
19
25–27 Lib
19
26–28 Sco
19
27–29 Sag
20
27–29 Vir
20
26–28 Lib
20
27–29 Sco
20
28–30 Sag
21
28–30 Vir
21
27–29 Lib
21
29 Sco–1 Sag
21
29 Sag–1 Cap
22
29 Vir–1 Lib
22
28–30 Lib
22
30 Sco–2 Sag
22
30 Sag–2 Cap
23
30 Vir–2 Lib
23
29 Lib–1 Sco
23
1–3 Sag
23
1–3 Cap
24
1–3 Lib
24
30 Lib–2 Sco
24
2–4 Sag
24
2–4 Cap
25
2–4 Lib
25
1–3 Sco
25
3–5 Sag
25
3–5 Cap
26
3–5 Lib
26
2–4 Sco
26
4–6 Sag
26
4–6 Cap
27
4–6 Lib
27
3–5 Sco
27
5–7 Sag
27
5–7 Cap
28
5–7 Lib
28
4–6 Sco
28
6–8 Sag
28
6–8 Cap
29
6–8 Lib
29
5–7 Sco
29
7–9 Sag
29
7–9 Cap
30
7–9 Lib
30
6–8 Sco
30
8–10 Sag
30
8–10 Cap
31
7–9 Sco
31
9–11 Cap
