# source: _OceanofPDF.com_Houses_-_Deborah_Houlding.pdf
# pages: 1-80
# compiled into: houses.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 1>>>

<<<PAGE 2>>>
THE HOUSES
TEMPLES of the SKY
by Deborah Houlding

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Republished in the UK in 2006 by
The Wessex Astrologer Ltd
PO Box 2751
Bournemouth
BH5 2AZ
England
www.wessexastrologer.com
ISBN 190240520X
© Deborah Houlding 2006
1st edition ISBN 1898503699 published in 1998 by Ascella Publications
A copy of this book is available in the British Library
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be used or reproduced in any
manner without written permission. A reviewer may quote brief passages.

<<<PAGE 4>>>
“Demonstrate the old houses to me, explain their number; prove that there can be neither
fewer nor more … show me undoubted and striking examples of their influence”
Johannes Kepler, letter to correspondent
Quoted in Kepler’s Astrology: Excerpts, selected, translated and edited by
Ken Negus (Eucopia Publications, Princeton, NJ, 1987).

<<<PAGE 5>>>
“A common form for a figure of the heavens at a nativity”
Demonstration of the houses in a traditional square chart; reproduced from
The Book of Instruction in the Elements of the Art of Astrology, by Al
Biruni, 1029; translated by R. Ramsay Wright (Luzac & Co, London,
1934).

<<<PAGE 6>>>
CONTENTS
Foreword by Robert Hand
Introduction: (Wheels and Signs - Theories on House Division)
Preliminary Guide to Divisions of the Celestial Sphere
1 Introducing the Houses: An Historical Overview
2 The Angles: Significance of Egyptian Solar Philosophy
3 Aspects & Gates: The 2nd/8th House Axis
4 Planetary Joys: 5th/11th House Axis
5 The King & Queen: The 3rd/9th House Axis
6 Cadency & Decline: The 6th/12th House Axis
7 House Rulerships in Practice
8 Technical Basis & the Inherent Difficulties of House Division
9 Ptolemy’s Powerful Places
Appendix A - Glossary of Traditional and Technical Terms
Appendix B - The Planetary Hours
Appendix C - Al Biruni’s Advice on Finding the Hour of Birth
Works Cited
General Index
House Rulership Index

<<<PAGE 7>>>
FOREWORD
BY ROBERT HAND
Houses are one of the most problematical components of modern astrology,
being at the same time among the most fundamental and controversial
components. Everyone who has any knowledge of modern astrology knows
that debate has long raged as to what is the proper method for computing
the cusps of houses. We have a wondrous diversity of methods, Koch,
Campanus, Placidus, Regiomontanus (also known as the ‘Rational’ system),
Equal House, Meridian, Morinus, and many, many more. The precise
location of cusps is so terribly important because so many techniques
depend upon knowing exactly where a cusp is. Yet modern astrology seems
no closer than ever to solving the problem of what is the correct method of
house division. This I think we all know.
What is not so clear is that the problem with houses is not limited to
how they are derived astronomically and mathematically. We have an
increasing problem with the significations of the houses as well. Especially
in the last few decades there has begun a serious drift in the meanings of the
houses. We are coming to disagree not only on the proper method of
determining house cusps but also on what the houses signify. In this book
Deborah Houlding deals mainly with this second problem, the drift of the
symbolism.
It is not difficult to understand how this situation has come about. I,
myself, did not use houses at all in my early work because their
interpretation and the arrangement of their symbolism seemed whimsical
and arbitrary. Yet even the significations of the houses as they have come to
us from 19th century astrology do suggest underlying patterns. I dealt with
a number of these in my own book, Horoscope Symbols. For example,
broadly speaking, the houses above the horizon are more social and
collective, while those below the horizon are more personal and individual;
houses opposite each other seem to be two aspects of a single category of
life; houses on the left (rising) side of the chart seem to be more related to

<<<PAGE 8>>>
an individual’s action while houses on the right (setting) side seem to be
more related to an individual’s experience; and so forth.
However, none of these patterns hold for every house in every part of
the chart. Every effort to rationalize the meanings of the houses and create
some kind of coherent theoretical foundation fails because of one or more
houses that do not fit a particular scheme.
Therefore, the great temptation is to ‘adjust’ the meanings of the houses
so that those houses which do not ‘fit’ can be made to fit. I proposed several
such adjustments myself in Horoscope Symbols (suggestions which I am a
bit more reluctant to make now). And it may ultimately turn out that we do
have to make such adjustments. But this should only be after we have
thoroughly understood the evolution of the significations of the houses
throughout history.
But while I have had access to many of the older books in the original
languages and in translation, I realize that most students of astrology have
not had this access. What is needed is a discussion of the issues of house
interpretation along with a good summary of the evolution of their
significations through time. This has not been available up until now. This
book fills that need. Here we have an excellent critique of the tendencies of
moderns to improvise upon and alter the tradition without paying enough
heed to what the tradition actually says; and the bulk of the book deals with
the history of the significations of each of the pairs of houses with the
variant significations laid out for all to see. It may ultimately be true that
modern astrology has to go its own way in sorting out the houses. But let us
at least do so, if we must, knowing that we have exhausted the possibilities
of the old traditions. With this book I believe that there is no excuse for
ignoring the history of the tradition. I would hope that even those
astrologers who have no special interest in traditional astrology, ie, the
astrology of the time before 1700, who might want to attack the problem of
the houses, will not do so until they have consulted this book or done
equivalent research on their own.

<<<PAGE 9>>>
INTRODUCTION
WHEELS & SIGNS: THEORIES ON HOUSE
MEANINGS
In any geniture every sign is affected by the sky’s division into temples; position governs
the stars, and endows them with the power to benefit or harm.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.856
Since classical times houses have been one of the four essential components
of astrology. Along with planets, signs and aspects, their 12-fold division of
the celestial sphere forms a fundamental building block in astrological
interpretation. Yet curiously, despite all the books that speak of the essential
message of house meanings, very little exists in contemporary literature to
foster a true appreciation of that essence by illustrating where the meanings
come from. The origin of their symbolism is poorly understood, and little
effort has been made by modern astrologers to investigate and define their
meaning.
It appears a tradition has built up concerning the nature of the houses
with little or no thought as to how they acquired their traditional meanings.
How do we know what they mean? Most of us learn their interpretation
early in our studies, remembering parrot-fashion a regime of house
meanings that we commit to memory and integrate into practice. We learn
that the 2nd house represents wealth and finances – why? Pregnancy
belongs to the 5th house – why? Imprisonment to the 12th house, death to
the 8th, travel to the 9th – again, it’s important we ask the question, why?
Yet if such questions are put to astrologers the response generally ranges
from a bemused “no idea”, to “because that’s what the signs mean”, or
“perhaps it’s numerological?”. Few of us have taken the trouble to explore
the origin and development of the houses and fewer still have perceived this
as an issue to be written about.

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Most astrologers would agree that a refined astrological practice
depends upon firm understanding of first principles. Where we have no
clear idea of the basis of house meanings, we grapple to incorporate new
rulerships. As a horary astrologer I am frequently consulted by students
who don’t know which house to draw signification from because their
reasoning is confused, and also by experienced astrologers who struggle to
decide upon the relevant houses for charts dealing with unusual situations.
Knowledge of the core concepts eliminates this doubt, making it clear and
obvious where any element of life, traditional or modern, fits into the house
division scheme. Herein lies the key to successful astrology: a confident
and unambiguous application of its symbolism.
Within the contemporary theories of house meanings, there are
presently only two that are given any real credibility. The first is a rather
glib assumption that the houses are associated with, and take their meaning
from, the signs of the zodiac. This is the point that Ralph Holden makes in
his book, The Elements of House Division, where he claims:
“Both [houses and signs] simply represent two ways of looking at the same concept
which is inherent in the root idea of the sign itself, be it Aries, Taurus, Gemini, or any of
the others…. Thus, the basic meaning of the first house is neither ‘appearance,
disposition, outlook, carriage, health, vitality or inherent condition’, but only ‘Aries’.
This in the end contains all that needs to be said.”1
Although modern natal astrology allows a considerable exchange of
meaning between houses and signs, the suggestion that houses derive their
meanings from signs is clearly contradicted in traditional texts, where a
much stronger distinction is readily apparent. At best this theory is an over-
simplification; at worst it blurs the edges of two quite separate astrological
tools resulting in slack symbolism, so vague as to be of little practical use.
Distortion creeps in, weakening the power of the symbolism and
gaining common acceptance because of its ease of use. Financial matters
and usable resources are no longer restricted to the 2nd house, but through
association ‘Taurus rules wealth’, and by extension Venus is used as a
natural significator for money. Those of us who have absorbed these ideas
without question should pause for reflection before modern deviants branch
off at further tangents and we lose the connection with first principles
entirely. Traditional rulerships will fall by the wayside as they become
inexplicable through the sign-originated theory. They will lose value by

<<<PAGE 11>>>
being misunderstood, and are likely to become replaced by inappropriate
suggestions that are only valid in such simplistic terms. If we are not
careful, then everything that properly belongs to the 5th house, but which
doesn’t tally with the symbolism of Leo, will be written out for convenience
sake; and then we may as well not trouble ourselves with the meanings that
derive from spatial qualities at all.
Let us review this ‘2nd house = Taurus = Venus = money’ theme as an
example. In ancient and traditional texts the sign of Taurus is not
descriptive of wealth; nor would a sign like Pisces be descriptive of
imprisonment. Signs and houses are treated as entirely separate concepts,
each with a specific role: that of the signs being to offer descriptive
information on the planets; that of the houses being to locate their influence
and offer a sense of empowerment or incapacity. Ancient astrologers
referred to the symbolism of Taurus in a descriptive manner, understanding
that it was earthy, cold, dry, melancholic, solid, feminine, nocturnal, fixed,
and bestial. Being a sign related to the fruitful period of spring, it was
conceived as productive, moderate and fertile. Taurus rules the throat and
typically depicts someone of broad forehead, large mouth, dark hair and a
strong neck and shoulders. It was understood to display stubborn, obstinate
characteristics, being somewhat clumsy with a simple intellect and a fixed
mental attitude, much like the creature used to symbolise it. The notion that
Taurus governs finance is a modern idea, derived from the sign’s
identification with the 2nd house, not the other way around.
Try to find a traditional reference to the planet Venus representing trade
or money. You won’t find one. If you consider the inherent nature of Venus
it is not a commercial planet at all. Venus seeks luxury yes, and all the
pleasant things that we associate with self-indulgence; but this soft, round-
edged planet has no hard-head for business matters. She may inspire us to
spend what we cannot afford on pleasant things, because Venus will
sacrifice all for a feel-good factor, but being the planet of self-indulgence
and enjoyment of luxuries does not make her the planet of money or
commerce. Traditionally that honour belongs to Mercury, the natural
significator of trade, barter, exchange; and of course, purses, treasuries,
coins and all the associated artefacts of currency.
As a further example of where this indiscriminate ‘mixing up and
swapping about’ can lead, consider the 11th house, the house of friendship
and hope. So undisciplined have we become in our application of basic

<<<PAGE 12>>>
doctrine, that one feels almost obliged to overlay the meaning of Aquarius
onto that of the 11th house – a situation which introduces serious distortions
if Uranus is thrown into the pot too. All of these are taught to have a similar
meaning, each of which can apply to the other. In the popular astrology
‘cook-book’ The New Complete Astrologer,2 Uranus has among its list of
descriptions, “humanitarian, friendly, and kind”; while Aquarius is
described as “unpredictable, eccentric, rebellious, contrary, tactless and
perverse”3 – an exchange of symbolism from planet to sign that gets
absorbed into house meanings via such common misconceptions as the 11th
house ruling earthquakes, astrology and social rebellion. Modern rulerships
such as these will be challenged here on the basis that their foundation is
unproven and unreliable. We need not assume that the popularity of
principles repeated within modern textbooks is an indication of merit, since
publishers will often promote simplification as a means to broaden their
market. Tying house meanings into sign symbolism may be very useful for
those whose natural curiosity will only stretch to three fundamental
principles instead of four, but being able to interpret similar loosened
qualities from various elements within the chart only leads to an endless
array of weakened symbolism which allows the imagination to conceive of
anything it wishes wherever it likes. This merely detracts from the depth
and detail that a more restricted and systemised approach to house
meanings can deliver.
A return to first principles would force us to admit that it is Uranus
which more closely fits the description of “unpredictable, eccentric,
rebellious, contrary, tactless and perverse”; allowing us to restore to
Aquarius its reputation as a ‘humane’ sign, renowned for its grace, tact and
sociability. The humane signs – the air signs – are the proud owners of a
remarkable capacity for intellectual communication and civil, rational
thought; unlike the animalistic signs of the zodiac, who are more inclined to
mulish, rebellious behaviour by lacking the social and intellectual skills that
air-signs possess. Through a return to first principles we might also admit
that no planet is less likely to display the traits of ‘kindness’ and
‘friendliness’ than Uranus; which from its first astrological observances was
reported to be ‘evil’ in influence and divisive in its effects. Uranus causes
separation, and whilst it releases tensions, it sometimes does so in a manner
that is so abrupt as to appear shocking, cruel and violent. Through a return
to first principles we might finally accept that the planets signify, the signs

<<<PAGE 13>>>
describe and the houses locate and empower; that they do so far more
effectively when each is given its own; and that in terms of explaining the
origin of house meanings Mr Holden could not be more wrong – the first
house has everything to do with “appearance, disposition, outlook, carriage,
health and vitality”, and much less to do with Aries than most of us
imagine.
Where Holden’s theory is founded upon an element of truth, is that a
relationship between sign and house meanings seems always to have
existed in anatomical matters, such that the 1st house and Aries both relate
to the head, the 2nd house and Taurus to the throat, and so on. For this
reason the 17th century astrologer William Lilly referred to the signs as ‘co-
significators’ for the houses, but the planets he identified as co-significators
had nothing to do with sign rulerships. Within his work associations
between signs and houses were given no particular emphasis beyond their
joint rulership over similar parts of the body. The assumption that they
could be equated in a more general sense seems to have taken root during
the popularisation of astrology in the 17th century and has been slowly
infiltrating our reasoning ever since. Renaissance astrologers who took their
study seriously objected to this distortion of astrological principles and saw
a need for caution, as evident by the tone of Nicholas Culpeper, when he
wrote in 1658:
“Some authors hold an opinion that the signs carry the same signification in order that
the houses of heaven do, and Aries should signify life, Taurus estate, Gemini brethren
and short journeys, you know the rest. Truly, my own opinion is that many authors
invented whimsies, and when they had done, set them down to posterity for Truth; who
taking them up without trial, cloathed tradition in plush and left poor reason to go in
rags. An author said so; ergo ‘tis true, right or wrong’.”4
Irrespective of whether astrologers find it effective to apply sign
meanings to houses in this way, the historical fact remains that house
meanings did not evolve out of the signs, but that the signs were adapted
and broadened out to incorporate the meaning of the houses which
correspond with their natural zodiacal order. As we will see through a study
of traditional rulerships and underlying principles, the houses acquired their
essential meanings through the incorporation of other, much more
significant, symbolic influences. They have a powerful philosophy of their
own which we would do well to recognise if we are to rid the chart of vague

<<<PAGE 14>>>
and imprecise possibilities of meaning and discover a focus on reliable and
specific details that have a more direct and practical value.
The second commonly accepted theory on the origin of house meanings
claim they are the result of a primary ‘cycle of life’ that begins with the
ascendant (our emergence) and concludes with the 12th house, where we
dissolve back into the unconscious reservoir from whence we came. This
has a particularly popular appeal as representing a psychological or spiritual
truth, and is lax enough to offer fertile ground for an active imagination.
This theory has been especially championed by astrologers who favour a
loose approach to symbolism because it only really works if one is able to
translate the traditional rulerships into an entirely new perspective. Howard
Sasportas was a prominent proponent of this view in his book The Twelve
Houses,5 where he claimed that the houses represent a wheel of life which
corresponds with their anticlockwise numeration. This seems to work with
the first few houses, and we are told that we “emerge, gain consciousness
and take physical form” at the ascendant; “encounter our sense of values
and recognise what we own” in the 2nd house, develop “ego-
consciousness” in the 3rd, and so forth (see diagram on following page).
Thereafter the logic of the theory starts to drift apart, and it offers no
rational explanation as to why the 8th house of death should precede the
10th house of career and aspirations; or why the 5th house of pregnancy and
children should precede the 7th house of partnership and marriage.
Attempts to reconcile tradition and contemporary use are clearly contrived,
and points in favour are supported by creative suggestions rather than
historical research and study. Again, the theory relies heavily on the use of
modern rulerships which find no verification in traditional practice,
perpetrating an ever increasing distortion of the traditional house meanings
in order to make the hypothesis fit.
The observable failure of the prevalent contemporary theories is that they
have chosen to ignore the interpretations that were considered conventional
and mainstream throughout the history of astrology. To perfect the fit we
must ‘evolve’ our understanding of the meanings into something which is
often quite the opposite of what astrologers in any previous age would have
allowed. The ‘loss, death and grief’ of the 8th house has undergone a quick
and dramatic evolutionary journey to become ‘transformation’ and through

<<<PAGE 15>>>
that ‘sexual creativity’; so that the traditional sense of decay is lost and a
powerful expression of new life is found in its place. Rather than attempting
to unravel the basis of house symbolism by considering its origin,
development and traditional application, it has seemed easier to change the
data to suit the explanation of it. But it simply is not possible to understand
the principles embedded into house meanings without making an earnest
attempt to explore the symbolic perspective they evolved out of. In this it is
essential that we approach the subject, not through the mind of a 20th
century astro-psychoanalyst, but with recognition of the philosophical and
cultural outlook of the civilisations that developed them: the ancient
civilisations, where a powerful understanding of universal and cosmic law
was steeped in myth, the value of which we are only now beginning to
appreciate. In doing so, we not only deepen our practical knowledge of their
meaning and essential signification, but we also explore the profound
insight by which the ancients saw the journey of life mirrored by celestial
patterns and cycles.

<<<PAGE 16>>>
The purpose of this book then, is to illustrate that none of the current
theories on signs and psychological wheels can be regarded as historically
correct, and that neither do they offer a full and reliable insight into the
‘fundamentals’ of house meanings which the astrologer relies upon in
practical application. Its aim is to recapture the strength of the traditional
perspective, where the astronomical and symbolic appreciation of spatial
qualities is invested into the very core of our art, used daily in our
interpretation of house meanings, yet so seldom receiving our reflective
attention and deep consideration.

<<<PAGE 17>>>
PRELIMINARY GUIDE TO DIVISIONS OF
THE CELESTIAL SPHERE
Readers new to traditional techniques may find the following account of
definitions and divisions helpful. These are explored in greater detail
throughout the book. Any other traditional terms employed are explained as
they arise and defined in the Glossary (Appendix A) for easy reference.
The Hemispheres
The celestial sphere is divided into two hemispheres by the horizon:
Above the earth: 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th – planets in these houses are capable of
being seen above the horizon. At a general level their influence is considered to be more
active, forceful and outwardly expressed (or social). The 10th house, being associated
with the midheaven, is particularly termed ‘above the earth’.
This hemisphere is known as the ‘diurnal hemisphere’ (diurnal meaning ‘of the
quality of the day’ and being similar in principle to masculinity in suggesting a direct
outpouring of energy and an expressive influence).
Under the earth: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th – planets in these houses are not capable of
being seen and lie beneath the horizon. At a general level their influence is more passive,
subtle, hidden, and related to private experience. The 4th house, being associated with
the lower midheaven, is particularly termed ‘under the earth’.

<<<PAGE 18>>>
This hemisphere is known as the ‘nocturnal hemisphere’ (nocturnal meaning ‘of the
quality of the night’ and being similar in principle to femininity in suggesting a retiring
energy and an impressive influence).
The sphere is also divided into two hemispheres by the meridian:
Rising: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 10th, 11th, 12th – as the celestial sphere appears to rotate around
the apparently stationary viewpoint of the observer in its daily revolution, planets in
these houses are rising up towards the midheaven, which represents the highest point in
their daily traverse of the sky. Generally their influence is more vigorous and related to
personal, self-initiated activity. The 1st house, being associated with the ascendant, is
particularly termed ‘rising’.
This hemisphere is known as the ‘oriental hemisphere’ (oriental meaning ‘eastern’)
because planets rise over the horizon in the east. (There is also an ‘oriental quarter’ – see
below.) Being associated with newly-risen planets, the definition of planets as oriental is
indicative of youth, dynamism and renewed stores of energy.
Setting: 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th – planets in these houses have passed their highest
point and are now declining towards the lower midheaven, which represents the lowest
point in their daily traverse of the sky. At a general level their influence is considered to
be weaker, more destructive/hostile, and related to experience that involves or is
instigated by someone else. The 7th house, being associated with the descendant, is
particularly termed ‘setting’.
This hemisphere is known as the ‘occidental hemisphere’ (occidental meaning
‘western’) because planets set beneath the horizon in the west. (There is also an
‘occidental quarter’ – see below.) Being associated with decline and the completion of
visibility, the definition of planets as occidental is indicative of ageing, lack of power
and depleted energy.

<<<PAGE 19>>>
The Quarters
The division of the celestial sphere by the horizon and meridian give four
equal quadrants or ‘quarters’. Each has its own quality and ‘humour’ which
unites the daily cycle of planets rising and setting over the angles with the
annual cycle of the seasons and the ‘ages of man’.
The influence of the ‘quarters’ acts only as an underlay to house
meanings but familiarity with the following principles will be useful when
following the arguments presented in this book.
The sanguine quarter: rises from the ascendant to the midheaven, embracing the 10th,
11th and 12th house. It is termed ‘eastern’ (or oriental) because it begins with the
ascendant which cuts the ecliptic in the east. It is classified as ‘masculine’ and associated
with the act of rising upwards, and therefore symbolically linked to new life, active
growth and projects or people in their infancy. In traditional predictive technique planets
found in this quarter relate to young people or hasten the effects of timing.1 Active
growth and increase are also attributed to the season of spring and the health-giving
sanguine humour which equates to the element of air. In keeping with its humour this
quarter is defined as ‘warming and moistening’ in the influence it imparts to the planets.
The choleric quarter: declines from midheaven to the descendant, embracing the 7th,
8th and 9th house. It is termed ‘southern’ (or meridional) because it begins with the
midheaven which cuts the ecliptic in the south.2 It is classified as ‘feminine’ and
although declining towards the descendant is still within the diurnal hemisphere and
therefore symbolically linked to activity, open expression and the period between youth
and maturity. Being associated with the full flourish of life it is related to summer and

<<<PAGE 20>>>
the heat-giving choleric humour which equates to the element of fire. In keeping with its
humour it is defined as ‘hot and dry’.
The phlegmatic quarter: declines from the descendant to the lower midheaven,
embracing the 4th, 5th and 6th house. It is termed ‘western’ (or occidental) because it
begins with the descendant which cuts the ecliptic in the west. It is classified as
‘masculine’ although, being associated with the period of life that stretches from
maturity to old age, it is related to autumn and the eliminating phlegmatic humour which
equates to the element of water. It is thus defined as ‘cold and wet’ in influence.
The melancholic quarter: rises from the lower midheaven to the ascendant, embracing
the 1st, 2nd and 3rd house. It is ‘northern’ because it begins with the IC which cuts the
ecliptic in the north. It is classified as ‘feminine’ and relates to the period of old age
(some say the period after death or before birth), through which it is associated with
winter and the binding melancholic humour which equates to the element of earth. It is
‘cold and dry’ in influence.
Angularity
From the above it can be seen that the angles are the defining influence
upon the qualities attached to spatial divisions. Proximity of the houses to
the angles and their classification into ‘angular’, ‘succedent’ and ‘cadent’
represents a central tenet of interpretation.
Angular houses: 1st, 4th, 7th & 10th – the most powerful houses where the influence of
the planets is especially strong; so called because they are associated with the angles of
the chart.
Succedent houses: 2nd, 5th, 8th & 11th – houses with an intermediate degree of
strength; so called because they are rising up (and therefore succeeding) to the positions
of the angular houses by the diurnal revolution of the heavenly sphere.

<<<PAGE 21>>>
Cadent houses: 3rd, 6th, 9th & 12th – the least powerful houses where the influence of
the planets is considered weak and exhausted; so called because they are falling away
from the angles by the diurnal revolution of the heavenly sphere (the Latin term cadent
means ‘falling’). That is, planets in the 3rd house have already passed through the 4th
house – where their influence was effective and strong – and are now far removed from
the next angle (the ascendant) which draws them towards it.
Virtues of the Houses
Although there are minor variations according to different authorities, the
order in which the houses are said to increase the efficiency of planetary
effects are as follows:
1st - 10th - 7th - 4th - 11th - 5th - 9th - 3rd - 2nd - 8th - 6th - 12th
Planets in the 1st, 10th are 7th house are therefore noticeably forceful in expression;
those in the 8th, 6th or 12th house are weak.
Houses of Joy
Each of the seven visible planets is linked to a specific house where its
influence is especially strong. Planets are said to ‘rejoice’ in these places
because the house offers a celestial environment that is appropriate,
supportative and in keeping with the natural influence of that planet.

<<<PAGE 22>>>
1
INTRODUCING THE HOUSES:
AN HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
Mark the power of the temples: through them revolves the entire procession of the
zodiac, which draws from them their laws and lends to them its own; the planets too,
modify the various influences of the temples whenever they occupy realms not their own
and sojourn in an alien place.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.960
Debate continues as to when astrology began to evolve as a formalised
study of the sky. No doubt observation of the Sun, Moon and stars has held
our attention since the dawn of human comprehension, but the oldest
detailed records we possess of astrology being practised with some
semblance of organisation are the Venus Tablets of Ammisaduqa, written in
Babylon around 1600 BC. Some scholars believe the texts are copies of
earlier ones made during the reign of the Babylonian king Sargon of Agade
(2371-2230 BC), who is said to have employed astrologers to nominate the
most fortuitous times for his projects. This is roughly the period during
which the Egyptian pyramids were constructed, and it is worth considering
that both of these ancient civilizations demonstrated mathematical and
astronomical refinement that was unparalleled in Europe until 3000 years
later.
However, contrary to what was once the prevalent view that the ancient
Egyptians actively employed and developed the astrology that became the
legacy of the Hellenistic world, there is little evidence to demonstrate that
some of the techniques used by classical astrologers were also employed by
Egyptian astrologers prior to the 4th century BC. Although the ancient
Egyptians had an astute awareness of celestial cycles and events, (much of
their religion and mythology was sky-based and there is a large body of
evidence to demonstrate the encoding of astrological symbolism into the
construction of monuments and temples), their emphasis fell more heavily
upon the constellations, and they were apparently less concerned with

<<<PAGE 23>>>
systematic, detailed planetary observations of the standard found in ancient
Mesopotamia.
With the ancient Mesopotamians we have a more direct verification of
the use of original astrological techniques that have filtered through to
modern use. Their astrology was observational in nature and interpreted in a
manner similar to the techniques of hepatoscopy: a very ancient divinatory
practice that is well attested from the old Babylonian period (1900-1600
BC). Here the liver of a sacrificial animal was studied and meaning drawn
from the shape, form, colour, distinction, direction, moisture content,
clarity, curvature, location and number of blemishes and marks. A similar
perspective applied to the sky was the basis of astrology: the interpretation
of a star or planet was derived from its colour, luminosity, speed, location in
the heavenly sphere and general physical appearance. Planetary location
was related to the four cardinal points and described in terms of lying east,
west, north or south; high or low; to the left or right. Each location had its
own significance: one Babylonian rule was “what is right is mine, what is
left is of the enemy”. Similarly east was considered a good, familiar
position, while the direction west was associated with hostility and enemies.
The gods of earth and nature were associated with the south, and the
infernal gods were associated with the north. The direction north-west was
the most inauspicious direction of all.1
Around 1000 BC detailed star catalogues were compiled in
Mesopotamia, and from the middle of the 6th century BC we have evidence
of the zodiac being introduced as a way of refining the measurement of
planetary positions. We lack an indication that houses were in use at this
time, and firm evidence of this does not appear until shortly before the
dawn of the Christian era.

<<<PAGE 24>>>
The diagram above is reproduced from an illustration of ‘the division of
sacred place’ presented in Jack Lindsay’s Origins of Astrology (p.18). It
depicts a liver-model derived from the ancient Mesopotamian tradition.
Within the 16 sections are noted the names of various gods who offer
rulership over the matters associated with the divisions. Lindsay notes
that they:
“had a strongly developed system of heaven-earth correspondences, with
orientations and divisions of space given a fundamental importance … Orientation
was determined by the four cardinal points joined by two intersecting straight lines:
the north-south line called the cardo (a word of pre-Latin origin) and the east-west
line the decumanus.”
Most authorities believe that houses were developed at about the same
time that the ascendant began to be marked upon charts, our first example

<<<PAGE 25>>>
of which dates to around 4 AD.2 It should be borne in mind, however, that
the common practice of committing charts to perishable papyrus, and the
fact that only two similar charts have been discovered from before this date,
makes this information of dubious reliability. We know that the eastern
horizon had been marked out by a particular star or constellation long
before the use of zodiacal degrees, and we also know that the
Mesopotamian culture placed great emphasis on the orientation and division
of space within all of its divinatory techniques. The fundamental reliance
upon the rising and setting of stars over the horizon leaves us with no doubt
that the cardinal points have always been the pivotal supports for
astrological interpretation, and never more so than in the astrology of the
ancients where the events of most significance were witnessed around them.
This is especially evident in Egyptian cosmology where the ‘two horizons’
are frequently referenced, as are the four cardinal points – each falling
under the protection of its own associated god, and holding great
significance in all matters relating to life and death. It would be logical to
consider that some kind of structured division of the heavens was being
used long before the date to which we can trace remaining evidence, both
for astronomical observation and for associated mystical and symbolic
purposes.
Within examples of a similar approach to spatial analysis found in liver
divination, there are notable variations to what we later see in astrological
house division, principally in the number of divisions, and the attributes and
gods ascribed to them. However, consistency remains in the basic principles
attached to spatial qualities and orientations such as left and right and east
and west. The inherent qualities of these are the same as those understood
by the Egyptians, the Pythagoreans, and all of the significant ancient world
philosophies; where east/right is associated with diurnal, masculine
qualities and left/west is regarded as nocturnal and feminine.
The techniques employed in early liver divination demonstrate this
universal understanding. The symbolic must at some level relate to the
physical, and the consistency exists because the meanings attached to
directions are determined by meteorological influences that dictate the
nature of our physical environment. Fundamentally they rest upon the
shifting cycles of light and dark which creates the extremes of day and night
and summer and winter, and draws association with polarities such as
activity and receptivity, growth and decay. Hence the symbolic appreciation

<<<PAGE 26>>>
of light and colour, shape and number, and speed and direction can be
witnessed as an unbroken tradition that underpins all ancient divinatory
practices and which also supports the astrological philosophy of aspects and
planetary meanings. The specific relevance of locations and orientations are
considered further in the following chapter, and examined through the
perspective of Egyptian mysticism. They undoubtedly represent the most
important foundation of qualities attached to cardinal directions, upon
which the specific meanings of each house developed.
Whilst the question of how much the ancient Egyptians directly
established the roots of the western astrological tradition remains a
controversial subject, we can at least be sure that their outlook on
directional qualities mirrored that of the Mesopotamians and other early
civilisations. We can also be sure that this well established and universal
perspective created the primary basis upon which the later developments of
Hellenistic astrology arose. By 331 BC Alexander the Great had conquered
most of Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt and Mesopotamia, engulfing the entire
region and making it all part of the flourishing Greek empire. Many priestly
colleges along the Euphrates river valley were dissolved by the invasions,
forcing priests to trade their esoteric knowledge westwards. The Greeks set
up important centres of learning at Athens, Babylon, and Alexandria, (the
city founded at the mouth of the Nile by Alexander the Great), and here the
ancient philosophies were to have a direct impact upon each other, creating
a cross-cultural intellectual pool from which the future development of
science, of which astrology was seen as integral, was nourished.
With the collapse of Mesopotamia, the conquering Greeks salvaged
many of her metaphysical and scientific advances, merged them with those
of the Egyptians, and added their own insights to create a philosophical
package which drew the wisdom of the East into the heritage of the modern
western world. Alexandria in particular became an important area for the
development of astrology, mainly due to its huge library, which extended to
500,000 manuscript rolls. Scholars were free to study there indefinitely
supported by royal funds, a tradition which was upheld when the city later
fell to the rule of Rome. Many distinguished astrological scholars, including
Ptolemy and Vettius Valens, lived and studied there, and it was at
Alexandria in Egypt that most of the existing astrological data was collated,
re-evaluated, and re-circulated. This was done with a great desire to retain

<<<PAGE 27>>>
the sacred mystical principles by which the older civilisation of Egypt had
masked its scientific secrets and had risen to such magnificent heights.
Around 150 BC the work bearing the names of the mythical Nechepso
and Petosiris was produced in Alexandria, a treatise to which many
astrological doctrines claim an origin. A further compilation of ancient texts
concerning astrology, magic and alchemy was the Hermetica, written in
Alexandria around 100 AD. At this time the Greek god Hermes, who had
never previously been associated with learning or philosophy, was favoured
with all the attributes of Thoth of the Egyptians and Nabu, the Babylonian
god of divination and knowledge who was represented by the planet
Mercury. Being worshipped across the three cultures as the god of learning
and wisdom, Hermes became revered as ‘Thrice-great Hermes’ – the name
also reflecting the belief that a god should be invoked three times. The
Hermetica is reputed to have been based upon the teachings of Thoth, but it
actually contains much less of ancient Egyptian origin than was once
supposed and is clearly influenced by Graeco-Roman ideas. The
willingness of the early authors to ascribe it to the Egyptians is assumed to
be a mark of the respect afforded to this ancient civilisation and an
indication of how keen the Greeks were to incorporate existing Egyptian
mysticism into their own philosophical studies.
Regardless of arguments concerning at what stage and to what extent
the Egyptians contributed to astrological philosophy, there is a need to
recognise that many of the principles of traditional astrology, (such as use
of the terms, faces, planetary hours, combustion, via combusta, and so
forth), are a legacy of their world-view. In the next chapter we will see that
the same may be said about the early origins of house meanings.
Firm evidence for the use of houses in chart judgements has been dated
to 22 BC, with the earliest extant book to describe their meaning being the
Astronomica of Manilius, written in Latin around 10 AD. Manilius displays
enough confidence in his description of house meanings to suggest that he
was relaying a current consensus of opinion rather than newly invented
technique, whilst his general referral to the mythological beliefs of the older
civilisations allows for the credible theory that house meanings were
established under the influence of Alexandrian study. If so, an apt place to
begin a search for their underlying principles would naturally take us to a
consideration of ancient Egyptian symbolism.

<<<PAGE 28>>>
2
THE ANGLES: SIGNIFICANCE OF
EGYPTIAN
SOLAR PHILOSOPHY
The third cardinal, which on the same level as the Earth holds the shining dawn, where
the stars first rise, where day returns and divides times into hours, is for this reason
called the Horoscope, and it declines a foreign name, taking pleasure in its own. Within
its domain lies the arbitrament of life and the formation of character.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.830
The Egyptians were strong believers in reincarnation and considered
physical death to be merely a transformative process within the ongoing
cycle of life. They perceived the Sun’s daily passage as a journey by which
the Sun-god passed through the cycle of death and rebirth each day: dying
in the evening at sunset to be born anew each morning at sunrise.
Just as the visible death of the Sun, Moon and stars occurred as they fell
under the horizon in the west, the Egyptians also believed that when the
soul left the body upon human death that too was pulled towards the
western horizon and followed the course of the stars. Consequently the
western horizon assumed a mythological connection with all aspects of
death, decline, weakness and retreat. The west was known as Amentat
meaning ‘the place of rest’, ‘death’ or ‘the portal of Duat’, and in reflection
of this belief nearly all the pyramids and royal tombs are located on the
Nile’s western bank. Conversely, the east was associated with beginnings
and the renewal of life-force. Ancient Egyptian illustrations of the Sun’s
passage across the sky frequently depict the Sun god ageing as the day
wears on, or travelling in different boats and taking the form of different
gods for each part of the journey: Khepri (whose name means ‘beginnings’)
in the morning, Ra (‘radiance’) at noon and Atum (‘completed’) or
Amun/Amen (‘hidden’) in the evening.

<<<PAGE 29>>>
Duat was the Egyptian name for the underworld. It formed the hidden
hemisphere beneath the Earth which reunited west with east. As the Sun-
god continued his journey through the underworld, his cycle of
transformation was completed in the centre of Duat: the nadir of the
heavens, which it reached in the middle of the night. Here the completed
Sun-god gave rise to a new manifestation and was transformed into a
developing infant, ready to be born again at sunrise.
Associated with this belief, various superstitions and folk customs
throughout the world link the cardinal direction of east with life and vitality,
south with power and fruition; west with death; and north with underworld
mythology. In Medieval Britain for example, places of execution were
generally located to the west of the city, with graves oriented eastwards to

<<<PAGE 30>>>
face the rising Sun. Churchyards were located on the south or east of the
church with only such people as criminals or unbaptised children buried on
the north side – this lay in the shadow of the church so was considered to be
a place of easy access to ‘darker spirits’.
The Lower Midheaven (IC): Fourth House
The underworld of the Egyptians was not the ‘hell’ of Medieval Christianity
however. The Egyptians saw death, not as an end to life, but as a transitory
stage within it: a period of purgence, rest and renewal. In ancient
philosophy the ‘lower depths’ represented the Spiritual Source: the
Universal Parent from which we emerge and ultimately return.
Correspondingly the 4th house is astrologically connected with ‘the
beginning and end of all things’, ‘parents’ and ‘the home’. Manilius wrote
that it controls the foundation of all things and symbolises the deepest
region of the Underworld. It indicates all that originates from, belongs to, or
is located in the ‘bowels of the earth’; thus it is associated with minerals
and the natural resources of the earth, such as coal, ores and oil; also the
mining of those resources. The 4th house, being an extension of the lower
depths and that which is hidden in the earth, acquired astrological rulership
over graves, buried treasure and wealth from hidden sources, also
symbolising the act of drowning as well as the means by which we explore
the past or the hidden roots of the present. It is of course the underworld
itself, with all its attendant associations of weakness, death, the aged or the
very young. In classical times it represented the parents; in the medieval
period it more specifically represented the father, through whom the
genealogical line is traced. Generally, it is connected with ancestry,
grandparents, family property, ancestral wealth and land. As in Egyptian
symbolism, it is the return to the source and the beginning and end of life -
the final conclusion, but also the seed of all future potential.
The list below outlines the classical attributions of the houses. Specific
mention is made of Manilius1 because he represents a very ancient
understanding of house meanings, and also Firmicus2 who lived at the end
of the classical period and hence typifies the later approach. Other
associations dating to the classical period are included, most of which are
taken from Neugebauer and Van-Hoesen’s Greek Horoscopes.3 By way of
comparison, the list also includes the main associations of Al Biruni (11th

<<<PAGE 31>>>
century Arabic),4 William Lilly (17th century European),5 and some of the
more common modern associations.]
4th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
The foundation of all things; wealth; mining of metal
and gain from hidden sources. Fathers and the plight
of the old. The temple of Saturn.
Others
(classical):
Parents, children; spirits; life in temple; repute.
Firmicus:
Parents; family property; substance; possessions;
household goods; anything related to hidden and
unrecovered wealth. Cardinal.
Al-Biruni:
Parents; grandparents; descendants; property; fields;
water-supply. What succeeds death and what happens
to the dead.
Lilly:
Fathers; lands; houses; tenements; ancestral
inheritance (paternity); farming and tillage of the
land; hidden treasure; determination or end of things.
Modern:
Beginning and end of life; parents; the mother (some
say); the home. Houses; land. Private life. Buried
emotions.
The Ascendant (Asc): First House
The ascendant signifies the point of ‘life’ because as the Sun rises here each
morning it distributes its life-giving properties of warmth and light to the
world. Traditional descriptions of the ascendant claim it represents ‘life,
formation of character and appearance’. It signifies our emergence into the
world, and since life requires a body to inhabit, this is what the ascendant
describes. It is our appearance and the outer expression of our essential
being: the two bound together through the principles of physiognomy, by
which physical form and facial features are considered revealing of
character.

<<<PAGE 32>>>
1st House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Life and formation of character; the early years;
education. The fortunes of children and the prayers of
parents. The station to which men are born;
profession; the success of enterprises. Temple of
Mercury.
Others
(classical):
Life; body; character; spirit.
Firmicus:
Life and Vital Spirit of men. Basic character and
cornerstone of entire nativity. Cardinal.
Al-Biruni:
Soul; life; length of life. Education. Native land.
Lilly:
Life; health and vitality; form and shape of body.
Modern:
Personality. The image we project. Outward
behaviour. Health; disposition and manners.
Many classical astrologers related the ascendant to the capacity of the
intellect as well as the basic character. It also indicates the state of our
health and ‘vital spirit’: whether we have the strength of will and vitality
needed to overcome hindrances and disease. The colour white is attributed
to the first house because of the light of the Sun (William Lilly notes that
the significator of a missing object in this house describes it as white or pale
in colour6). Since light is symbolic of life, the characteristics of other
houses are to some degree dependent upon their ability to gain access to its
life-supporting properties via their aspectual relationship to the ascendant
(see following chapter).
The Midheaven (MC): Tenth House
As the Sun approaches the midheaven it attains its maximum strength and
magnificence of radiation. Correspondingly, the 10th house signifies the
status, reputation, and position in life to which we aspire. Manilius called it
“the citadel of the sky” and referred to is as the temple of “glory”,
“distinction”, “honour” and “the consummation of success”:

<<<PAGE 33>>>
“Hence comes applause, splendour, and every form of popular favour; hence the power
to dispense justice in the courts, to bring the world under the rule of law, to make
alliances with foreign nation’s on one’s own terms, and to win fame relative to one’s
station.”7
As the pinnacle of the chart, the 10th house shows the aspects of our
personalities that we manifest out into the public world – our ‘professional’
selves. It indicates the social standing that we may attain by our own
efforts, as opposed to the legacy of family status attached to the name or
lineage which classical astrologers related to the 4th house. Similarly, some
classical astrologers associated the bearing of children with the 10th house,
seeing it as an area which dealt with both the ‘fruit of our labour’ and the
‘fruit of our loins’.
As an area where we aspire to raise our standing within society, the
planetary influences upon this house indicate whether success is to be found
in any venture that receives public attention or scrutiny. In modern business
charts it has great significance upon matters of promotion and ‘brand
identity’. In a birth chart a luminary upon the midheaven is said to bring the
native into the public eye; whilst in event or horary charts it will show
circumstances that are brought out into the open, (alternatively, significators
‘under the earth’ or combust keep things secret and hidden).
For the same reason the 10th house has much to do with judgements and
decisions. Manilius clearly associated it with the expression of power and
authority, to which a traditional association with the enforcement of law and
judgement in legal matters can be traced. Firmicus asserted that the
midheaven affected all our actions and dealings with others and had the
greatest influence of all; an opinion echoed throughout most of the classical
texts. It is considered to be the crown of the chart and a planet placed upon
the midheaven will powerfully influence any matter. Although the 4th
house has general signification over parents, mothers were particularly
attributed to the 10th house to distinguish them as the partner of the father.
10th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Glory; distinction; honours; popular favour, power;
the rule of law and justice in the courts; alliances with
foreign nations. Fame relative to one’s station.

<<<PAGE 34>>>
Consummation of success. Wedlock. The temple of
Venus.
Others
(classical):
Career; accomplishment; honours; reputation. Wife,
children.
Firmicus:
Life and Vital Spirit; all our actions; home, country.
Professional career, all our dealings with others.
Infirmities of the mind. Cardinal and the greatest
influence.
Al-Biruni:
Government with council of nobles; absolute
authority; success in business; commerce;
professions. Liberality.
Lilly:
Honour, dignity; royalty; commanders; judges;
authority. Profession. Mothers.
Modern:
Aspirations; career; profession; social status.
The Descendant (Dsc): Seventh House
With the movement of the Sun towards the descendant, Egyptian
philosophy recognised a weakening of vitality, a loss of power, death, or the
necessity for retreat. The lack of personal strength associated with the
descendant gave it a reputation as a ‘hostile angle’, where one is susceptible
to the influence of malign events and enemies. Manilius linked it with the
consummation of affairs and the closing years of life because the Sun died
here each night at Sunset:
“It speeds the falling sky beneath the earth and buries the stars … wonder not if it is
called the portal of sombre Pluto and keeps control over the end of life and death’s firm
bolted door. Here dies the very light of day, which the ground beneath steals away from
the world and locks up captive in the dungeon of night.”8
As the ascendant is symbolic of light and represents white or pale colours,
the loss of light at the descendant caused this house to be associated with
black or or very dark colours.
There is evidence of a rapid growth of astrological ideas between the
writings of Manilius and Ptolemy, and by the time Ptolemy wrote his
Tetrabiblos, a century and a half later, it was common for astrologers to

<<<PAGE 35>>>
associate the 8th house with ‘the beginning of death’. The descendant
retained its association with critical periods of danger however, as seen in
Ptolemy’s formula to establish the length of life where he says:
“… the destructive degrees in the prorogation that follows the order of leading signs are
only the degree of the western horizon, because it causes the lord of life to vanish.”9
The signification of the 7th house for opponents and therefore ‘the other’ –
both in love and war – is partly explained by its diametrical aspect to the
ascendant.10 However, the symbolic influence of the direction west is an
integral element of this. The west is generally perceived as hostile or
weakening through its association with darkness, and has a very ancient
signification relating to those who confront us. Under Pythagorean
philosophy, which takes it origin from concepts employed by the ancient
Mesopotamians and Egyptians, the orientation right is linked to the east and
left is linked to the west. Throughout scripture and in all world philosophies
the symbolic use of the right or the east is taken to imply qualities that are
beneficial, strong, righteous, direct, open, familiar and fixed upon the ‘self’;
whereas the left and the west are symbolic of strength and energies given
over to others, originating a sense of union, partnership and committal (as
seen in this house’s association with marriage) but also implying a
weakened sense of self and an indication of potentially harmful, indirect,
obscure, sinister or unfamiliar energy.
Similarly, the east is noted as masculine and diurnal, while the west is
feminine and nocturnal. Hence masculine planets are said to be
strengthened in the eastern areas of the chart, and the feminine planets
rejoice in the western quadrants. In particular, references are found to the
Moon being strongly dignified in the descendant and debilitated in the
ascendant – the rules of electional astrology still dictate that it is
unfortunate to place the Moon in the ascendant when electing the best time
to start new ventures. Although we associate partners of any gender with
the 7th house in contemporary astrology, initially the 7th house was mainly
attributed to the female and was used to signify women in general.
7th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
The consummation of affairs; the conclusion of toil;

<<<PAGE 36>>>
the closing years and end of life; death; worship of
the gods; marriages; leisure; social events; banquets.
Others
(classical):
Marriage
Firmicus:
The nature and number of marriages. Cardinal, but
aspected detrimentally to the ascendant.
Al-Biruni:
Women, concubines; marriage feasts. Contentions.
Partnerships. Losses. Lawsuits.
Lilly:
Marriage; partners; public (known) enemies; thieves.
The opposing party in love, war, quarrels or lawsuits.
Modern:
Those with whom we must share our lives or actions,
or those in a close relationship of an emotional or
business nature. Open enemies. The ‘not self’ –
projection.
Within the quadrants of this ‘cardinal cross’ the cycle of life revolves:
conception occurs at the IC, though emergence into manifestation, or
physical form, occurs at the ascendant. The quadrant from the ascendant to
the midheaven relates to the period of youth and vigour; that from the MC
to the descendant relates to middle-age and maturity, and that from the
descendant to the IC represents old age and death. Early astrologers such as
Antiochus or Porphyry described the quadrant from the IC to the ascendant
as representing a final state of infirmity or the period after death,
(preparation for rebirth)11 whilst in the mid-17th century Jean Baptiste
Morin, one of the few astrologers to offer a philosophical explanation of
house meanings, also recognised this underlying cycle of experience as a
basis for his Cabal of the Twelve Houses Astrological:
“What part of Heaven then (Nature her self guiding and teaching us) shall we call the
First Cause of the Natural Beginning of every thing? Surely that which in the very
Beginning of the thing, ariseth above the Horizon thereof and arising causeth the thing it
self also to arise. For, certain it is that of all the places of Heaven, the East is more
powerful than the rest, as is testified by all Astrologers, concerning the Rising,
Culminating, and Setting of the Stars; and as Experience it self convinceth, in the
Change of Air … But successively, that Part of Heaven, which is more elevated above
the Horizon, and possesseth the Mid Heaven, in the rise or Beginning of the thing, shall
have the Government of the vigour and Operative vertue thereof; That which setteth at

<<<PAGE 37>>>
the same time, the Declination of it, from its perfect estate: And lastly, That which
obtains the Bottom of Heaven, shall be taken for the Cause of its Corruption.”12
It seems that Howard Sasportas was on the right track in considering the
houses as ‘cycle of life’ or ‘wheel of experience’, but his mistake was to try
to identify it within their numerological order. This order corresponds with
the astronomical motion of a planet through the signs of the zodiac, but in
astrology it is the diurnal motion of heaven from east to west – brought
about by the daily rotation of the Earth upon its axis – that carries a far
deeper significance. Ptolemy referred to this as the ‘First Primary Motion’
which overrides the natural motion of the planets as they strive to progress
through the zodiac. The 14th century poet Geoffrey Chaucer summarised its
importance in writing:
“First Cause of Motion, Cruel Firmament,
Driving the Stars with Thy Diurnal Sway
And Hurling all from East to West
That Naturally would take another way.”13
Although it first appears to contradict this order, the numeration of the
houses is actually based upon it, originating from the two hourly ‘watches’
of Egyptian astronomers. The houses are numbered anticlockwise because
this is the order that the stars within them rise and become visible at the
Eastern horizon – hence the ascendant was known as the horo-scope
meaning ‘watcher of the hour’.

<<<PAGE 38>>>
For modern students, a major reversal is required to fully comprehend
the ancient empirical basis of the astrological techniques in use today. The
symbolic importance of the cycles that occur around us are only perceived
if we lift our eyes and our minds from our static, two-dimensional charts,
and reconnect with celestial motions as they are experienced by human
senses: rising in the east, culminating in the south14 and declining in the
west. Zodiacal measurement locates planetary positions along the ecliptic,
but this is a universal measurement; it says nothing about the personal
signatures of the planets as they relate to specific locations at specific points
of time. This is one of the major functions of the houses – the definition of
the celestial positions with regard to local space. The major reversal is that,
through the influence of modern science, we have been taught to view our
cosmos as a heliocentric system and we tend to conceive of it from the
outside looking in. But astrological symbolism interprets celestial positions
as they are drawn down to the earth and requires us to maintain the
geocentric perspective of being on the inside looking out. The divisions of
the houses, at least initially, developed out of this. Once our perspective is
realigned, the true nature of the fundamental cycle is readily apparent. The
angles of the horoscope relate to the universally accepted ‘tree of life’
which connects the existence of man with the cycle of nature of which he is
a part.

<<<PAGE 39>>>
In effecting an underlying structure, diurnal revolution explains a great
deal, but it does not reveal the full meaning of the individual houses
because other symbolic systems have played a part. It is however, of
particular relevance to the interpretation of the 2nd and 8th house axis, and
the following chapter considers the association between the 2nd house and
financial matters, the 8th house and death; and how the relevance of
aspectual connections to the ascendant are interwoven through the
interpretations of the house division scheme.

<<<PAGE 40>>>
3
ASPECTS & GATES
THE 2ND/8TH HOUSE AXIS
Each of the signs, as it revolves, receives the influence of Heaven and to Heaven imparts
its own. The nature of the position prevails, exercises jurisdiction within its province,
and subjects to its own the character of the signs as they pass by, which now are enriched
with distinction of every kind, and now bear the penalty of a barren abode.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.860
One way in which modern astrology often fails to utilise the full potential of
house signification is in reducing them all to the same strength and efficacy;
ignoring the fact that location within the sphere impacts upon the
prominence and force (or inhibition and weakness) of planetary expression.
In our eagerness to avoid the negative-undertones of words like ‘malefic’,
‘unfortunate’ and ‘destructive’ we must be wary of not inverting this
essential influence of the houses, or of limiting their value by being
prejudiced towards everything having a constructive, creative or
superficially positive interpretation. The 8th house remains the house of
death, loss and grief, no matter how pleasantly we wrap that up in digestible
phrases such as ‘personal-transformation’.
The ancients placed great emphasis upon whether a house was
describing an active and augmenting area of heaven, or one that induced
recession and decline. The use of the terms cardinal, succedent and cadent
reflect this, and offer rich descriptions to illustrate whether who or what is
being symbolised is healthy or ailing, near or far, powerful and vibrant, or
impoverished and insecure.1 These qualities are often woefully understated
in popular modern texts, whilst astrologers practicing with traditional
methods use them constantly in determining the outcome of a conflict or
lawsuit, finding lost objects or missing persons, discovering the course of a
relationship or illness, or the potential of a job offer. Sometimes, the entire
interpretation of the chart can hinge mainly upon this one consideration.
Although the description of the realm of life in which a planet is operating
is obviously a very significant element of house interpretation, we shouldn’t

<<<PAGE 41>>>
deny the extent to which the houses can also empower a planet; or indeed
castrate it when the area is a ‘barren abode’.
Astrologers, even in striving to offer a positive resolution to any
problem, must first take account of reality; including the reality of failure,
the need for withdrawal, and the disheartening experience of loss. The
ancient perspective portrayed the houses in terms of powerful = good; weak
= bad, though their vision was never as simplistic as that of those who
interpret this viewpoint out of context. No one could suggest that ancient
philosophies lacked a healthy respect for retreat and decline, or failed to
recognise its rightful place in the broader balance of life, but most of us
would agree that it’s a more comfortable position to be strong, active and in
control, than to be ineffectual, infirm or impotent.
Where traditional texts speak of houses that are bad, weak, barren,
destructive or evil, they describe the areas where there is a lack of dynamic
planetary expression; the planets’ ability to exercise their influence being
impeded according to the degree of ‘destructiveness’. This naturally
symbolises the areas in life where we are unable to effectively control our
environment. We may become the victim of circumstance or inherit the
consequences of our own past actions. Sometimes tragedy may occur for no
apparent reason, or hindrances that we might otherwise shrug off appear
(through our weakened sense of control) more intimidating and
overwhelming. A psychological insight is useful, and often essential to find
the best way to navigate through these difficult periods, but it cannot
transmute a situation which is riddled with loss into one that is potentially
full of gain and happiness, without the processing of the loss. Destruction,
and the experience of alienation, exist, no matter how hard we twist the
symbolism around or look beyond the scope of the present. In any full cycle
of life there will always be the joy of creativity and attraction, many periods
of pleasure and success interspersed with sadness and grief, separation, and
the closure of physical death. Without negative astrological terminology in
our symbolic expression, we would be working with a very weak and
incomplete vocabulary.
One factor that largely determined the ancient recognition of house
‘empowerment’ is the aspectual relationship between the cusps of the
houses and the ascendant. Since the ascendant represents the entry of light,
and therefore life and vitality, the aspect (view) that each house has of the
ascendant determines both the quantity and quality of ‘life-energy’ imbued

<<<PAGE 42>>>
into that area of heaven, determining an essential focus of meaning that has
filtered through to the evolution of modern interpretations. The 7th house,
for example, is a powerful house where planets are capable of exerting a
strong and dynamic influence because it directly faces the ascendant by
opposition and has easy access to its light. In facing it ‘head-on’, any planet
in this area has a forceful resonance of energy. By opposition we need not
expect this to be a comfortable energy (consider the unease you can feel
when someone is speaking to you with their eyes locked directly into
yours), but it is intense and emotive because of the very direct confrontation
with the ascendant, the pivotal point in the cosmic scheme. When planets
here relate their signification to other people in our lives, either through
projection or direct experience, we can expect their influence upon us to be
passionate and dramatic, and in some way characterised by the extremities
of love or hatred. The 7th house therefore signifies the people who are
brought into a close and intimate relationship which surpasses that of
common acquaintance and in some way sees us identifying ourselves as a
half within the whole. The term ‘significant other’ is generally applied
because it relates as much to adversaries as lovers or partners.

<<<PAGE 43>>>
The same is true of the 10th and 4th houses, which access the ascendant
by a forceful square aspect. Their essence is power and strength of
influence: that of the 10th being manifest and observable; that of the 4th
being deep-rooted and fundamental. The 9th and 5th houses are favourable
and have positive associations because they are aspected to the ascendant
by harmonious trines. The aspectual relationship has allowed these houses
to acquire less traumatic significations than would have otherwise been the
case. The 9th house is cadent, but generally considered to be less
weakening than other cadent houses because of this, and in recognition of
its location in the upper realms of the chart. The 5th house is reputedly one
of the most pleasant areas of the chart, despite being tucked away ‘under
the earth’. The 11th and 3rd houses are similarly considered beneficial
because they are linked to the ascendant by the sextile aspect; the 11th
much more so than the 3rd, due to its elevated position. The benefits of the
3rd house are diminished by the fact that it is under the earth and cadent.
However, the 2nd, 8th, 6th and 12th houses are linked to the ascendant
by aspects that are traditionally considered too weak and ineffective to be
conducive of support: the inconjunct and semi-sextile. The inhibited access
to the light of the ascendant means that all of these houses are regarded as
‘dark’ areas, symbolically denoting a lack of vital energy. Other factors
must be considered, but within the fundamental meaning of these houses
there is an underlying principle of subdued self-expression.
The Second/Eighth House Axis
Failure to discriminate between the strength of planetary influences as they
traverse the various regions of the chart, can lead to modern variations of
house meaning that are popularly believed to recognise and extend from
originating astrology philosophy, but actually disregard it.
With the 8th house, this becomes of particular concern when it is said to
describe the sex life, or the potential for pregnancy. Such an idea arises
from the view that the area is one which deals with personal transformation
at a most profound level – since it is the house of death, then by extension it
must suggest a rebirth and the process that leads to such a birth too. But
death, at whatever level it occurs – be it physical, material, spiritual or
emotional – is the process of loss that operates within the larger perspective
of personal transformation which the chart as a whole relates to. It has

<<<PAGE 44>>>
cycles and stages of its own, being preceded by weakness and succeeded by
grief. Only after an appropriate period of mourning and readjustment can
creative energies re-emerge to foster the growth of new life. Pregnancy,
therefore, belongs to the fertile area of the 5th house, and never to the 8th,
because this is an area that captures the essence of ‘loss of creativity’. The
idea of astrologers electing a good time to enjoy sexual activities by
strengthening the influence of the 8th house could be amusing; were it not
for the abusive violations and experiences of fear and anguish related to sex
that may fall within its domain.
Another dubious notion is the belief that a chart where the emphasis
falls upon the 8th house represents a good time to apply for a loan or enter
into a financial arrangement with another person. This idea is based upon
the rulership of the 8th house over ‘other people’s money’, since it is the
2nd house from the 7th. Astrologers who apply this logic often forget that
the 8th house is the area where our loss can become another’s gain. In
horary charts drawn to locate lost or stolen property, for example, the
significator in the 7th house shows it has fallen into another person’s hands;
in the 8th they have turned it into a financial asset. It is good to have
‘friendly’ 8th house influences in such charts, but in matters concerning our
own financial matters it is most important to see that the 2nd house is
supportative and free from affliction.2
Traditionally the second house is representative of our own substance
and profit whilst the 8th indicates an area of decline. The origin of this can
again be traced to the cycle of nature and the Sun’s interaction with the
Earth. It is worth noting that originally the 8th house was known as ‘the
beginning of death’, because from its cusp the heavenly sphere falls
towards the descendant. The area is an entirely unfortunate one – it has no
effective access to the light of the ascendant and its diurnal motion is one of
decline.
The lack of any strong aspect from the ascendant to the 2nd house also
gave this house an unfortunate reputation in early astrology. Like the 8th,
classical astrologers knew it by such ominous names as the ‘Gate of Hades’,
‘Gate of Hell’, or ‘Portal of Pluto’, a tradition arising from the ancient
Mesopotamians and Egyptians who placed the rulership of the direction
north under the ‘Guardians of the Gates’. Manilius gave little detailed
description of the influence of the 8th-2nd house axis, except to show that it
was unfortunate and affected by ‘underworld’ symbolism:

<<<PAGE 45>>>
“Suspended, the former [8th house] faces downward, the latter [2nd house] on its back,
they either fear destruction at the hands of the neighbouring cardinal or will fall if
cheated of its support. With justice are they held to be the dread abodes of Typhon,
whom savage Earth brought forth when she gave birth to war against heaven.”3
The text of the 4th century astrologer Firmicus Maternus gives a better
insight into the origin of the 2nd house’s association with wealth. He sees it
as a house of ‘increase’; yet whilst he recommends that it should be known
primarily as ‘the house of hope’4 he also mentions that it is called the ‘Gate
of Hell’, which he assumes is due to the lack of access to the light of the
ascendant:
“This house shows increase in personal hopes and material possessions. But it is a
passive house and not aspected to the ascendant. Therefore it is called the Gate of Hell,
because it is not in any way aspected to the ascendant.”5
Significantly however, Firmicus also includes older Greek terminology,
which informs us that the 8th house was known as Epicataphora, which
means ‘falling down into the Underworld’. The 2nd house was known as
Anaphora, ‘rising up from the Underworld’, illustrating that although both
were regarded as portals to the underworld and incorporated darker
elements in their symbolism, there was an important distinction – the 8th
was the portal of entry, the 2nd of release.
A further clue to the symbolism of the 2nd house lies in the ancient
myth of Ishtar’s descent into the underworld. It was impossible to enter the
underworld unless completely naked, so her journey involved the removal
of all her garments and jewels upon entry, these being returned to her
possession upon release. The myth reflects the cyclical process of loss and
increase which is symbolic of death and rebirth. The following extract from
World Mythology by Donna Rosenberg is her own introduction to the myth
which seems appropriate here. Her book is written about mythology, not
astrology, so offers an independent viewpoint to consider. It is especially
significant if one considers that there is an ancient association between
Saturn (the traditional planet of death) and the 4th house; and the Moon and
the 3rd house (the 3rd house was known as ‘Dea’ meaning Goddess to
classical astrologers because it was ‘the house of the Moon’):

<<<PAGE 46>>>
The chart wheel shows some of the main spheres of activity associated with the houses by Firmicus
and his contemporaries. It includes the planets which were considered to have ‘proper residence’ in
each place, and which Firmicus referred to in the manner “this is the house of Venus”, etc.
“In early agricultural societies, productive soil was of major importance, and the entire
community was earth-oriented. Ancient farming peoples observed that plants and people
were born, grew to maturity, and died, and that others were born again, often the
following spring. This fact became the central focus of religion. Death was an accepted
part of the life cycle, for it was followed by rebirth or new life. The people worshipped

<<<PAGE 47>>>
the Great Goddess to insure the fertility of their fields and themselves so that their
community would survive.
Hades was not only the god of the dead, from which new life would emerge, but he was
also known as the god of wealth. (His other name, Pluto, was derived from ‘Ploutos’
which means wealth.) The dead earth revived each spring to burst forth with new plant
life; in addition, the earth contained the metals (copper and tin) from which bronze was
made.”6
From this passage it can be seen that the association of the 2nd house with
wealth and material increase arose as a development of its underworld
connection. It also makes sense that the ancients called the 3rd house ‘Dea’
meaning Goddess, because it was the Earth Goddess who continued the
process begun by Hades and returned fertility to the Earth.
At an early stage the whole area surrounding the lower midheaven was
one that related to the hidden process of renewal, the seed germinating
beneath the ground, and the foetal embryo of returning fertility which
celebrated its appearance at the ascendant. Within this process the 2nd
house, being the portal of release, acquired a symbolic representation of the
return of hope and physical and spiritual increase. It was seen as a house of
expectation of benefit, as opposed to the 8th house being an area holding
only fearful anticipation of loss. Over time this led to a more defined
association with wealth, resources, material possessions, and all that assists
our survival, with its general condition reflecting whether these are in
meagre supply or abundance.
2nd House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Unfortunate. The abode of Typhon.
Others
(classical):
Livelihood; profit; inheritance; estate; fortune;
business; gain. Intercourse with women.
Firmicus:
Increase in personal hopes and material possesions.
Expectation of inheritance and wealth. Passive and
debilitated because it does not aspect the ascendant.
‘Gate of Hell’ (Anaphora).
Al-Biruni:
Nutriment; livelihood; assistants. Profession of
children. (10th from 5th)

<<<PAGE 48>>>
Lilly:
Estate, fortune, substance, wealth and poverty.
Moveable goods.
Modern:
Financial matters and possessions. Resources which
support the physical body. Income. Feelings.
8th House Associations Through History Manilius:
Manilius:
Unfortunate. The abode of Typhon.
Others
(classical):
Death and its nature; trial; penalty; loss; weakness.
Firmicus:
The kind of death. No planet other than the Moon
rejoices in this house and then only in nocturnal
charts. Debilitated and passive because it does not
aspect the ascendant. Called ‘Gate of Hell’
(Epicataphora).
Al-Biruni:
Death; murder, poison. Inheritance. Wife’s property
(2nd from 7th). Expenditure; poverty.
Lilly:
Death; wills; partner’s money. Fear and anguish of
mind.
Modern:
Income, taxes, legacies; shared feelings, sex, birth
and death. Big business. Insurance. Crime.

<<<PAGE 49>>>
4
PLANETARY JOYS
THE 5TH/11TH HOUSE AXIS
In this temple dwells Jupiter: let its ruler convince you that it is to be reverenced.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.893
Although all houses derive some of their meaning from the Sun’s
relationship to the earth, not all of them are as clearly dependent upon it as
those discussed so far. Obviously other factors are involved and in
searching for the origin of meanings it soon becomes apparent that there is
no one single philosophy that can be used to completely illuminate the
evolution of their significations. Our current house meanings are the
product of amalgamated symbolic viewpoints whose integration has settled
over many centuries. Significations attached to spatial sections are to some
extent borne from diurnal revolution, but aspects have also played a part, as
have inter-house relationships and proximity to the cardinal points. Another
dominating influence was what we have now come to know as the planetary
‘joys’ or areas where the planets ‘rejoice’. These have been fleetingly
mentioned so far and are illustrated in the diagram showing the rulerships
of Firmicus, who referred to the eleventh house as ‘the house of Jupiter’
with the same sense of natural affiliation as when he refers to Sagittarius or
Pisces as ‘the sign of Jupiter’. To classical astrologers the relationship
between a house and its planetary ruler was very considerable. In modern
astrology the associations have become all but forgotten.
The use of planetary ‘house rulers’ is paramount in the work of
Manilius, who referred to the houses as the temples of the planets. His
scheme is notable (and often dismissed) however, because he differs from
other authorities in attributing Venus to the 10th house and Saturn to the
4th. All later authors of the sources we have extant consider Venus to take
residence in the 5th house and Saturn in the 12th. But this point could be of
substantial importance, since it can be seen that an alteration in house
meanings also occurred with the alteration of the planetary rulers. Consider

<<<PAGE 50>>>
first the description that Manilius offers of the 10th house, considered by
him to be ‘the temple of Venus’:
“To this abode is fittingly given the power to govern wedlock, the bridal chamber, and
the marriage torch; and this charge suits Venus, the charge of plying her own weapons.
Fortune shall be this temple’s name; mark it well.”1
Manilius was not unique among the early astrologers in attributing marriage
to the 10th house; other authors, including Ptolemy, followed him in that.
But it is interesting to note how his understanding of this ‘abode’ ties in
with the natural signification of the planet he associates it with. By contrast,
his description of the 5th house is very brief and bears little resemblance to
the interpretations of later authors who were to recognise it as the house of
Venus. Speaking first of the 11th house, Manilius continues to describe its
polar opposite:
“Like this temple [the 11th house], but with an inverse likeness, is that which is thrust
below the world and joins the nadir of the heavens [the 5th house]. Wearied after
completion of active service [as it passed through the 6th] it is again marked out for a
further term of toil, as it waits to shoulder the yoke of the cardinal temple and its role of
power [as it moves towards the 4th]: not as yet does it feel the weight of the world, but
already aspires to that honour.”2
Some astrological historians suggest that Manilius’ variance on the
association between houses and planets should be dismissed as an error, but
deeper scrutiny of his text reveals the connection between a planet and its
‘temple’ to be much more emphasised and influential in his interpretations

<<<PAGE 51>>>
than we find in later works. More likely, the associations he described were
very much in line with the scheme he was presenting, and they certainly
seem central to the meanings he attributed to the houses. The evidence for
this is also striking in the case of the 4th house, which Manilius described
as the temple of Saturn:
“Where at the opposite pole [from the MC], occupying the foundations, and from the
depths where midnight gloom gazes up at the back of the Earth, in that region Saturn
exercises the powers that are his own: cast down himself in ages past from empire in the
skies and the throne of heaven, he wields as a father power over the fortunes of fathers
and the plight of the old.”3
Here the natural association between Saturn and the traditional rulerships of
the 4th house appear too convincing to be brushed aside as a mistake. The
17th century astrologer William Lilly, for example, linked patrimony
(ancestral wealth) with both Saturn and the 4th house; the same is true of
agriculture, the aged, fathers, the earth, toil, mining, minerals, drowning,
death, burial and tombs. In fact, almost everything traditionally linked with
the 4th house is also naturally associated with Saturn.
Rather than concluding that Manilius’s astrology is flawed in its
presentation, it seems much more reasonable to assume that this was part of
the design. Manilius is the oldest source to which any house interpretations
can be traced, so he perhaps portrays an earlier cultural viewpoint, one that
was subsequently adapted to modify the way the houses and planets were
linked together. Manilius states that he is introducing to the classical world
“strange lore untold by any before” and his many references to oriental
gods and myths suggests that he was more directly in touch with the
philosophies of the older civilisations than the later classical authors whose
works were to become the influential sources for western traditional
astrology. In addition, the classical culture brought a move towards
rationalisation and the impulse to emphasise the logic and science in
astrology at the expense of the mystical. Philosophers of the classical period
were concerned with neat, balanced and philosophically pleasing schemes,
particularly in the case of aligning planets to sects, an issue which sets the
astrology in Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos apart from the more ancient texts of star
lore.
When Ptolemy classified the planets within their sects he defined them
as either masculine or feminine, and either diurnal (of the day) or nocturnal
(of the night). For the most part these terms, derived from Pythagorean

<<<PAGE 52>>>
philosophy, are synonymous: the day, characterised by light, heat, activity
and force, is generally considered masculine; night, characterised by dark,
cold, passivity and rest, is generally considered feminine.
But there is a variation in the particulars: the division of
masculinity/femininity is primarily dependent upon the qualities of dryness
(masc.) or moisture (fem.), whilst the division of diurnal/ nocturnal is more
dependent upon the qualities of heat (diurnal) or cold (nocturnal).
Mercury is dual-natured; both masculine and feminine it is equally
suited to the diurnal or nocturnal hemisphere, though appears particularly
well placed in the ascendant, where night and day intersect. It was
associated with the 1st house, to which ancient astrologers also gave
rulership of the intellect. William Lilly notes that Mercury rejoices in this
house:
“because it represents the head and the tongue, fancy and memory; when he is well-
dignified and posited in this house, he produceth good orators.”4
Of the planets, the masculine planets, Jupiter, Saturn and the Sun, are
considered diurnal; the feminine planets, Venus and the Moon, are
nocturnal. Mercury, which is dual-natured, belongs to both sects, having an
asexual nature that is responsive to its location in the sphere and its aspects
with other planets.
We might naturally assume that Mars, a hot planet, is administered to
the diurnal sect; and that Saturn, a cold planet, is nocturnal. However, this is
not the case. Ptolemy argues that these two destructive planets should be
assigned to sects opposite their own natures in order to temper their malefic
influence because:
“When stars of the same kind are joined to those of the good temperament their
beneficial influence is increased, but if dissimilar stars are associated with destructive
ones the greatest part of their injurious power is broken.”5

<<<PAGE 53>>>
This does not mean that Mars is strengthened in a nocturnal location; it
means that its excess of heat is subdued and moderated, so that its power to
destroy is lessened. The same is true of Saturn. These two planets are
extreme and intemperate which is why they are considered naturally
malefic. They become less likely to damage if Mars (excessive in heat) is
located in a cooling environment and Saturn (excessive in cold) is located
in a warming one. Therefore all the planets attributed to the diurnal sect
(Sun, Jupiter and Saturn) express their energies more favourably in the
diurnal hemisphere, whereas the nocturnal planets (the Moon, Venus and
Mars) are more favourable in the nocturnal hemisphere.
The definition of planets according to the diurnal or nocturnal sect is
based upon familiarity with the Sun and Moon, and the importance of sect
in traditional astrological techniques can hardly be overstated. Part of the
astrologer’s task was to evaluate the strength and dignity of each planet
before any kind of judgement was made, and the affinity of the planets with
their own sects was one way to do this. The 13th century Italian astrologer
Guido Bonatus includes the following in his list of considerations for
astrologers:
“The 47th [consideration] is to consider whether the Significator be in his light or no,
that is, a diurnal planet in the day, above the earth, and in the night under the earth, and a
nocturnal planet in the night above the earth and in the day under it: for this renders such
planet more strong. But if a nocturnal planet be Significator of anything in the day above
the earth, or a diurnal planet in the night, the same is thereby weakened and under a kind
of impediment, that he can scarce accomplish what he signifies.”6
William Lilly termed the correspondence of a diurnal planet in a day chart,
above the earth and in a masculine sign ‘hayz’, but he thought it more
appropriate to find a nocturnal planet in the night in a feminine sign and
under the earth. In horary questions the significator so found shows “the
content of the querent”.7
Reading through the interpretations of planets in the houses given by the
4th century astrologer Firmicus Maternus, it is clear that he lays great stress
upon whether or not a planet corresponds with its own sect, with diurnal
planets suffering a measure of affliction in nocturnal charts (and vice versa).
This example of his interpretation of Saturn in the 10th house illustrates the
difference affected by a planet being in or out of sect:

<<<PAGE 54>>>
“20. Emperors, generals, and praetorian prefects are the indication of Saturn in the tenth
house, that is the MC. If Saturn is on the MC by day and in his exaltation with the Sun
on the ascendant, this will make respectable farmers of good character, but wealthy,
whose holdings are near the sea, rivers, or lakes. It will also provide large income, great
glory, and inheritance from important persons, especially if Mars is not in aspect. But if
Mars in strongly aspected he will diminish this good fortune.
21. Saturn by night on the MC indicates misfortunes; loss of inheritance, no marriage,
no children, especially if he is in the house or terms of a malefic planet. But if a benefic
planet, that is, Venus or Jupiter, is in favourable aspect to Saturn thus located by night,
those things which were denied will be given in another way. But in general, Saturn by
night on any angle indicates the greatest evils. He destroys wives and children and
always predicts grief from loss of relatives.”8
With these examples in mind, it can be presumed that once classical
astrology adopted sect as a dominating influence, it would have been
considered highly inappropriate for Venus – a nocturnal, feminine planet –
to hold dominion over the pinnacle of the diurnal hemisphere; and equally
inappropriate for Saturn – a masculine, diurnal planet – to govern the lower
nocturnal angle. By re-assigning the ‘temples’ of these two planets from
those described by Manilius, the whole scheme falls neatly into place: the
diurnal planets reign in the diurnal hemisphere while the nocturnal planets
reign below.
Naturally, it would be important to place a beneficial planet such as
Venus in a suitably favourable house; and although all the houses below the
horizon are considered secondary to those above, the 5th is the most fitting
because of its harmonious trine to the ascendant. Similarly, although Saturn
shares less of a natural association with the 12th house than it does with the
4th, they have familiarity because both are considered baleful and their
influence is limiting and restrictive.

<<<PAGE 55>>>
The Fifth House
The preceding discussion shows that, in the case of the 5th house, we have
an interesting example of how planets associated through the concept of
house rulership or ‘joy’ have reflected their meanings into the houses, and
how those meanings have modified in accordance with alteration of the
planetary associations. Even if we accept that much of the 5th house’s
fortunate reputation is derived from the trine aspect to the ascendant, the
specifics of the meanings used by authors after Manilius are clearly
Venusian in origin. Firmicus is quite clear in informing us that classical
astrologers called the 5th house the ‘House of Good Fortune’ because it is
the house of Venus. Consider some of its traditional associations: –
• The principle rulership of the 5th house is in signifying pregnancy and
children, as befits Venus, the ‘goddess of fertility’ of whom the classical
historian Pliny wrote:
“… its influence is the cause of the birth of all things upon earth; at both its risings it
scatters a genital dew with which it not only fills the conceptive organs of the Earth but
also stimulates those of all animals.”9
• The 11th century Arabic astrologer, Al Biruni, called it the house of joy,
clothes, pleasure and friends – all of which fall naturally under the
rulership of Venus.10

<<<PAGE 56>>>
• The 12th century Hebrew astrologer, Ibn Ezra, describes an association
with pleasure, food, drink, gifts and diplomats.11
• The 16th century astrologer, Claude Dariot, used the 5th house for
signification of love, ambassadors and gifts.12
• The 17th century astrologer William Lilly called it “the house of
Pleasure” and associated it with taverns, plays, recreation and sport – all
of which he also ascribed to the natural signification of Venus (including
sport as a pleasurable, recreational activity).13
5th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
A region of uncertainty.
Others
(classical):
Children, good fortune; friendship.
Accomplishments.
Firmicus:
The number of children and their sex. Called the
house of Good Fortune because it is the house of
Venus. Favourable because it aspects the ascendant
by trine.
Al-Biruni:
Children, friends, clothes, pleasure, joy. Wealth of
father (2nd from 4th).
Lilly:
Children, pregnant women. Banquets, taverns, plays,
gaming, Ambassadors.
Modern:
Creativity, children, pleasures, holidays, love affairs,
gambling, sport, gifts, all pleasant things.
In every instance the derivation from Venus is striking. Modern astrology
books that suggest the 5th house is the house of pregnancy and ‘creativity’
because it relates to the 5th sign, Leo, disregard the fact that Leo is marked
throughout tradition as a sterile and barren sign – in matters of pregnancy
one of the main arguments to judge a denial of fertility. A little reflection
upon historical literature shows that few, if any, of the principal rulerships
associated with the 5th house derive from Leo; the house has been indelibly
tinged with the aura of Venus. It is significant that Manilius did not mention

<<<PAGE 57>>>
any of these rulerships in his description of the house. He did not place
Venus there so had no reason to do so.
The Eleventh House
The opposite house to the 5th, the 11th, was known to the classical authors
as the ‘House of Good Spirit’. A planet appearing in the 11th house has
distanced itself far enough from the ascendant to be seen in clear vision,
and in the rising of the Sun will be free of combustion. Symbolically, it is
perceived to have freed itself of the connotations of captivity and
invisibility associated with the 12th house and to have moved into a
condition of strength, freedom, release, hope, triumph, movement towards
the attainment of desires and general good fortune. Naturally, this is the
temple of Jupiter.
Today we call the 11th house the house of friends but that also implies
benefactors and anyone who helps and supports our aims, as befits its
planetary ruler. All of the symbolism underpinning the interpretation of this
house is favourable. Besides its affiliation with the ‘greater benefic’, it
forms a sextile relationship with the ascendant and, most importantly,
enjoys an elevated position above the earth, rising in diurnal motion
towards the summit of heaven. It is this movement upwards towards the
midheaven which gives the house a connection with motivation and
positive ambition. Manilius tells us that the 11th house is the most fortunate
house of all, better even than the 10th; for whilst the midheaven represents
completion and power, it has nowhere to aspire to – the only movement it
can make is to decline:
“Consummation attends the topmost abode, and no movement save for the worse can it
make, nor is aught left for it to aspire to.”14
Not so the 11th house, this “surges ever higher being ambitious for the
prize”. Hence it is associated with hope, trust, and expectation – the
working towards something whilst the goal is still ahead to garner
inspiration. It bestows optimism, joy, faith and luck. Lilly knew it as the
house of friendship, hope, trust, confidence and praise, and noted that if
anyone asks if they will obtain the thing they hope for, or has a secret wish
and is reluctant to tell you what it is, the condition of the 11th house ruler

<<<PAGE 58>>>
will reveal whether or not they will attain what they want.15 A favourable
11th house and a strong 11th house ruler is a blessing in any chart.
11th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Hope, ambition, triumph. Blessed with the lot of
Happy Fortune. The temple of Jupiter.
Others
(classical):
Good luck, hope; attainment of desires, freed persons,
friends, gifts, children.
Firmicus:
Called Good Spirit. Favourable because it aspects the
ascendant by sextile and is the house of Jupiter.
Al-Biruni:
Happiness, friends, praise, love, friendship of women,
ornaments, commerce, longevity.
Lilly:
Friends and friendship; hope, trust, praise, comfort,
promotion by recommendation of friends; secret
hopes and wishes.
Modern:
Friends and acquaintances, clubs and societies.
Objectives in life, intellectual pleasures. Detached
contacts made in day to day affairs.

<<<PAGE 59>>>
5
THE KING & QUEEN
THE 3RD/9TH HOUSE AXIS
That part of heaven which rises first from the bottommost regions and brings back the
sky once more controls the fortunes and fates of brothers; and it acknowledges the Moon
as its mistress, who beholds her brother’s realms shining on her from the other side of
heaven and reflects human mortality in the dying edges of her face. Goddess is the name
to be given to this region.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.856
The more the origins of astrology are explored, the more apparent it
becomes that the complex structure of its techniques has arisen out of the
simplest needs of survival and society. Contemporary astrology adapts
house meanings to embrace concepts pertinent to modern life, but their
essence is timeless and universal, relevant to all races and creeds. The
struggle for existence and relationship with the cosmos; life; mating; the
rearing of children and family relationships; the provision of nourishment
and shelter; liberty and health; sickness and death – these basic concerns
unite us all, man and beast, and are the pivots upon which all later additions
to the houses are attached. Though astrology lends itself to many different
shades and styles of life, its strength is that it is fundamentally a study of
life.
Similarly, the origin of many astrological techniques is a simple
recognition of the cycle of the Sun and Moon around the Earth. These two
planets are always considered as partners and opposites: the Sun is of the
day and its domain lies in the upper regions of the chart, whereas the Moon
belongs to the night and reigns in the lower realms. Contrary to what might
appear to make sense to us, the ancients did not regard the 10th house as the
temple of the Sun and the 4th as the temple of the Moon but chose instead
the 9th and 3rd houses. This seems, again, to point to an older, underlying
recognition of diurnal movement, whereby it is the Sun’s passage through
the 9th house, in the period immediately after noon, in which solar radiance
is recognised as being most powerful and effective, (so that we are

<<<PAGE 60>>>
generally warned to stay out of the Sun during this period of the day in
summer).
The Third House
For symbolic purposes, it was also appropriate to associate the Moon with
the 3rd house and not the 4th. The 4th was connected with death which is
why Manilius called it the temple of Saturn, ‘the Great Reaper’. But from
the process of death life resumed again under the influence of the Moon,
whose links with fertility were obvious. The Moon was the personification
of the Great Goddess, whose essence pervaded the earth offering nurture
and protection; accordingly the 3rd house was called Dea meaning
Goddess. In the words of Ptolemy:
“The Moon, as the heavenly body nearest the earth, bestows her effluence most
abundantly upon mundane things, for most of them, animate or inanimate, are
sympathetic to her and change in company with her; the rivers increase and diminish
their streams with her light, the seas turn their own tides with her rising and settings, and
plants and animals in whole or in some part wax and wane with her.”1
In traditional astrological philosophy the Moon represents the mundane,
elemental world, the animal spirit, or ‘Spirit of the Earth’. In astronomy, the
Earth and the Moon hold a special relationship – together they form a
binary system with a shared centre of gravity that lies within the body of
Earth. Our ancestors were aware of the integrated relationship between the
two bodies because of the obvious influence of the Moon’s cycle and its
corresponding effect upon tribal and cultural concerns and matters of
community. As a consequence it is not out of place to find the Moon, our
immediate neighbour in space, governing a house that relates to our
immediate environment on Earth. Today we know the 3rd house as ‘the
house of neighbours’ but this shift in terminology no longer reminds us of
the sense of community spirit which was so vital to our ancestors. It not
only implies our close environment, but also our everyday surroundings and
the tight-knit community with whom we exchange ideas and viewpoints.
Brothers, sisters, cousins and lateral contemporaries are the principal
concerns of this house;2 but not the older generation of parents or
grandparents who are represented by the 4th house of roots and inheritance.
Traditionally, parents were never expected to dialogue with their children as
equals in the way that a brother or sister would; their role was to instil a

<<<PAGE 61>>>
sense of moral values, to protect and pass-down the lessons of their own
experience, allowing the next generation to benefit from the wisdom of age
and maturity.
3rd House Associations Through History
Manilius:
The fortunes and fates of brothers. Temple of the
Moon.
Others
(classical):
Brothers, friends, relatives. Wealth; messages.
‘Goddess’; royalty, slaves, travel.
Firmicus:
Brothers, sisters and friends. Travellers. Favourable
because it aspects the ascendant by sextile. Called
Dea, ‘Goddess’.
Al-Biruni:
Brothers, sisters, relations, relations-in-law, jewels;
friends; mitigation; short journeys.
Lilly:
Kin and neighbours. Small or inland journeys.
Letters, rumours, reports and messages.
Modern:
Family; school life, education; short journeys,
communications. Speech, mind, environment. Self-
expression.
Among the principal rulerships of the third house we find: writing,
messages, rumours, all forms of communication and short journeys.
Naturally we assume that these derive from the third house’s association
with the third sign of the zodiac – Gemini – and its planetary ruler,
Mercury. But to the ancients, the Moon always held a special responsibility
for communication, and in particular for conveying meaning through the
written word – which was originally perceived as a sacred symbol, no less
magical than any other symbol in its ability to convey meaning and intent.
With the ancient Egyptians, the Moon-god Thoth was the ‘god of scribes’
whose symbol was the stylus. He was the secretary and messenger of the
gods and embodied most of the characteristics that were later attributed to
Hermes by the Greeks and Mercury by the Romans.

<<<PAGE 62>>>
The recent findings of Gauquelin’s research have reminded astrologers
of the importance of the Moon in charts of professional writers and
authors,3 but traditional astrological literature has always supported this
view. Both the Moon and Mercury are primary significators of the ‘mind’,
with Mercury tending to represent the rational and the Moon tending to
represent the imaginative. However, when the 16th century astrologer
Jerome Cardan speaks of the influence of planetary spheres over areas of
learning, he associates Mercury with geometry and arithmetic but links the
Moon’s realm to the sphere of learning grammar.4
In ancient times the Moon was known as the ‘Traveller’ because of its
rapid movement through the heavens, and we frequently encounter lists
such as that in William Lilly’s Christian Astrology, which includes as the
type of men and women symbolised by the Moon “travellers”, “letter
carriers” and “messengers”.5 This is because transference through the Moon
(by its separation from one planet and application to another) symbolises
the relaying of information, the passing on of a message, or the
communication of interest. In traditional astrology the Moon’s principal
role is ‘transmitter of influences’, whereby it collects the virtues of the
planets as it moves between them and brings their influence down to bear
upon the sublunar sphere of the earth. Guido Bonatus referred to the Moon
as a mediatrix between superior and inferior bodies saying:
“For she is the schoolmistress of all things; the bringer down of all the planets’
influences, and a kind of ‘internuncio’ between them, carrying their virtues from one to
the other, by receiving the disposition of one planet and bearing it to another.”6
The Moon’s special responsibility upon the mundane, the ‘everyday’ and
the ‘earthly’ is also clearly expressed in the natural philosophy of William
Ramesey:
“She is most powerful in operation of all the other Planets on Elementary bodies, by
reason of her proximity to us, and her swiftness, by which she transfers the light and
influence of all the Superiors to us, by her configuration with them.”7
Direct evidence that this sort of lunar influence is embedded into the third
house significations, appears in Bonatti’s explanation of the planetary joys:
“The Moon rejoices in the third because the third signifies short and quick journeys, and
things which change quickly, and which repeat. Whence the Moon signifies speedy and
quick changes from one purpose to another, from one thing to another.”8

<<<PAGE 63>>>
It would be wrong to assume that the Moon’s proclivity for change has
arisen out of an association with the third house. That is clearly not the
case. The Moon is an impressionable and changeable planet because it takes
its virtue from the planets it communicates between, causing rapid shifts of
emphasis and influence, and becoming empty of influence when void of
aspect. As Ramesey observes:
“She is neither fortunate nor unfortunate, but as she is placed and in configuration with
either the Fortunes or Malevolents”.9
Rather, it is likely that the third house’s signification over changeable
environments and short journeys evolved out of its association with the
Moon. The traditional signification of the Moon includes the everyday
environment, the tribal community, swift journeys and changes, writing,
and all forms of communication. We should surely take it as more than
coincidence that the house conceived as her temple and named in her
honour rules all of those things too.
The Ninth House
Whereas the Moon was associated with the Great Earth Goddess,
influencing human life through its earthly and mortal environment, the Sun
was the Supreme Lord and Ruler of the Divine Heaven. To the Egyptians
the disc of the Sun signified the face of God and research into the ancient

<<<PAGE 64>>>
theology of widespread cultures increasingly demonstrates that solar-
symbolism underpins the concept of God as the creator and source of all
life. The 9th house, traversed by the Sun immediately after noon, was
recognised as the temple of the Sun. Manilius said of it:
… “where the height of heaven first slopes downward and bows from the summit, these
Phoebus [the Sun10] nourishes with his splendour; and it is by Phoebus’s influence that
they decree what ill or hap our bodies take beneath his rays. This region is called by the
Greek word signifying God.”11
Through this identification with the Sun, the sovereign of heaven, the 9th
house is associated with fate, destiny and the will of the gods. Its traditional
rulerships include religion, revelations, dreams, visions, and soothsaying.
Today we call it the house of religion and the Church, often forgetting that
spiritual matters were once intricately linked with divination as a route to
Divine Revelation. Cardan referred to the Sun’s sphere as that which
pertained to the moral world;12 although ancient pagan religion was not only
concerned with doing what is morally right, but also paying due respect to
the gods, connecting with their will, and winning their approval in order to
gain their favour.
The 9th house’s connection with the Sun - and the Sun’s connection
with divination - is reflected in the characteristics of most Sun-gods. From
the 5th century BC onwards the chief of the Sun-gods for the Greeks was
Apollo who was associated with light, honesty and purity as well as
wisdom, divination and prophecy. His characteristics were similar to
Shamash, the Sun-god of the Mesopotamians, known to them as ‘the
revealer of truth’; the god who was able to cast his light into dark mysteries
and reveal all that was hidden and obscure.
In the 9th house, the elemental, mundane knowledge gleaned from the
daily experiences of the 3rd house, is lifted to a higher level of
comprehension, one that is inspirational and probing of grander mysteries.
Being associated with the Sun, all things concerned with Higher Spirit or
philosophical understanding are attributed here, and it is linked with places
where wisdom and understanding are developed (such as universities, at
one time the dominion of the church). Its identification with long distance
travel is said to be an extension of the desire to learn, in the sense that we
travel to broaden our horizons physically and mentally, and this seems
naturally supported through the modern association with Jupiter. However,

<<<PAGE 65>>>
the ancient origination lies in the classical notion that all the cadent houses
represent alien places, foreign territory and travels that take us away from
the comfort and security of home. Through the 3rd house’s association with
the Moon’s rapid changes and mundane environment, the journeys given to
the 3rd house are swift and never too unfamiliar. But the 9th house,
connected to the Sun’s longer, annual journal, and seen as representative of
the seat of divinity, is reflective of places and situations that are far beyond
our normal reach and which take us into the unknown. This is often tied
into spiritual quests and places of retreat. It is noteworthy that when
William Lilly judges of long journeys, he uses the 7th house as denoting the
intended place of destination, and sees a significator in the 9th house as an
indication that the traveller:
9th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Destiny and decrees of the gods. Temple of the Sun.
Others
(classical):
Travel. God; manifestations of the gods; revelations;
soothsaying. Friendship of and benefit from kings.
Firmicus:
Religion. Foreign travel. The social class of men. The
house of the Sun god. Favourable because it aspects
the ascendant by trine.
Al-Biruni:
Travel, religion, fate, attainment of knowledge from
the stars and divination. Philosophy, interpretation of
dreams.
Lilly:
Foreign lands; long journeys; far away places.
Religion; clergy. Dreams, visions; learning.
Modern:
Higher education. Travel; foreigners; languages.
Moral ideas, conscience, dreams.
… “is gone from the place to which he first went into a further country, or if capable he
is entered into some religious order or .. is imployed in some journey far distant from his
former abode.”13

<<<PAGE 66>>>
The 3rd and 9th houses are also known to have been used to represent
royalty in the classical period, with the 9th house specifically representing
kings and the 3rd house representing queens. Although other aspects of
astrological symbolism would seem to support a stronger basis for royalty
being attributed to the 10th house, there is no explanation for this other than
that it evolved through association between house meanings and the two
luminaries who acted as their sovereigns.

<<<PAGE 67>>>
6
CADENCY & DECLINE
THE 6TH/12TH HOUSE AXIS
It is enough for now to have recorded the Temples of Heaven and their names, the innate
influences of each place, and the deities that dwell within.
Manilius, (c. 10 AD) Astronomica, II v.965
In ancient astrology the 12th and 6th houses had similar meanings, both
connected with weakness, infirmity and toil. Manilius said of their axis:
“The temple that is immediately above the horoscope and is the next but one to heaven’s
zenith [12th] is a temple of ill omen, hostile to future activity and all too fruitful of bane;
nor that alone, but like unto it will prove the abode which with confronting star shines
from the occident and adjacent to it [6th]. And so that this temple should not outdo the
former, each alike moves dejected from a cardinal point with the spectacle of ruin before
its eyes. Each shall be a portal of toil; in one you are doomed to climb in the other to
fall.”1
From this passage it can be seen that the overriding basis of their weakness
is their cadency – each alike moves dejected from a cardinal point with the
spectacle of ruin before its eyes. The word ‘cardinal’ comes from the Latin
cardo meaning ‘hinge’, ‘axis’ or ‘pivot’, and is used in a general sense to
indicate something of primary importance. To Manilius the cardinal houses
represent power because they support the heavenly sphere. He claims:
“These points are charged with exceptional powers, and the influence they exert on fate is
the greatest known to our science, because the celestial circle is totally held in position by
them as by eternal supports.”2
The succedent houses are so named because the planets within them succeed
by diurnal movement to the cardinal position. Manilius said that the 5th
house it is not as yet in the position of power but is ready to aspire to it –
meaning that diurnal motion will carry the stars within it to a position of
greater influence when they enter the 4th house.

<<<PAGE 68>>>
The Latin word cadent means ‘falling’ or ‘declining’ and comes from the
same root as the word cadaver which means ‘decayed’ or ‘fallen’, and which
in a medical sense refers to a corpse. A planet in a cadent house has been
carried by diurnal movement away from the cardinal position, symbolising
someone who has moved from a position of strength into a condition of
weakness, or representing a fall from grace. The angular houses signify our
own ‘seats of power’, places of familiarity and control. The further the
distance between a planet and the angles the less potency it possesses and
the more alienation it experiences in its environment. Originally all of the
cadent houses had some representation over foreign places and situations.
The lack of familiarity undermines the ability to be effective, in turn
denoting weakness and bringing implications of fear and danger. But
whereas the fortunate aspects from the ascendant to the 3rd and 9th houses
alleviate this, in the 6th and 12th it is aggravated by poor access to the light
of the ascendant.

<<<PAGE 69>>>
* The time frame is established by what makes sense to the situation
The Twelfth House
Although we continue to refer to the 9th house as ‘the house of the church’,
we have generally slipped from recognising it as a house that is reflective,
not only of philosophical and intellectual quests, but also all shades of
spiritual or religious belief and experience. The 9th house relates to
meditative, inspirational, personal, pagan, divinatory and mystical
influences, as well as orthodox worship and ecclesiastical customs.
Whatever the nature of your god, whatever the basis of your belief, even the
rejection of it in atheism, this is signified by the 9th house. Overlooking this,
many modern textbooks associate astrology and astrologers with the 11th
house, perhaps being unwilling to recognise astrology as primarily
divinational, although science and all fields of learning that attempt to
advance human knowledge are attributed to the 9th house too. Similarly,
many traditionally 9th house matters such as dreams, visions, spiritual
communications, ‘revelations from the gods’ – even spirituality itself and

<<<PAGE 70>>>
union with God – are frequently associated with the 12th house, through a
combination of its association with ‘the unknown’, assumption of Piscean
‘intangibility’, and the modern theory that the 12th completes the ‘life-cycle’
of the houses through dissolution.
12th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Temple of ill-omen, misery, bane and toil. Hostile to
future activity. Doomed to climb.
Others
(classical):
Bad luck; self-undoing; slaves; enmity; danger;
infirmity; death; foreign country.
Firmicus:
Enemies; slaves; defects and illnesses. Called Malus
Daemon, ‘bad spirit’. House of Saturn. Debilitated
and passive because it does not aspect the ascendant.
Al-Biruni:
Enemies; misery; anxieties; prison; debt; fines; bail;
fear; adversity; disease; cattle; harbours; slaves;
servants; exile.
Lilly:
Secret enemies, witches, sorrow, self-undoing;
imprisonment. Great cattle such as horses, oxen and
elephants.
Modern:
Seclusion. Service to others; charity. The unconscious;
self-sacrifice; escapism, mysticism.
This is one area where it would be easy to misrepresent the fundamental
basis of the 12th house signification through associations that edge further
and further towards positive implications. That which is unknown may be
reflective of the unconscious but it would take a serious distortion of
astrological philosophy to view this house as indicative of spiritual
connections with God. Such a suggestion is not supported by traditional
texts, which refer to the 12th house as ‘evil’ – the most difficult, hostile and
unfortunate area of the chart. In view of the fearful terminology it is no
wonder that modern astrologers find the traditional associations of this house
unpalatable and sometimes prefer to look away. Termed ‘the portal of toil’
by Manilius and ‘Bad Spirit’ by others, it is traditionally associated with

<<<PAGE 71>>>
imprisonment, slavery, poverty, misery, malicious motivation, disgrace,
infirmity, self-undoing, and all manner of affliction by which vital self-
expression is impeded. It describes that which is kept hidden and out of
sight; hence it relates to secrets, clandestine activity, subterfuge, and
manipulative enemies. William Lilly gave it signification for witches and it
is possible that our idea of mysticism springs from that.3 But Lilly was
thinking of “such men as maliciously undermine their neighbours, or inform
secretly against them”4 a characteristic appropriate to the essentially malefic
nature of the house whereas our general understanding of spirituality and
mysticism is not.
The basis for the unfortunate reputation given to 12th house is the
assimilation of various strands of negative symbolism. Cadency lies at the
root of it, but Ptolemy proposed that adversity is further emphasised because
the luminosity of stars in this portion of heaven is obscured by its acute
angle to the ascendant and the exhalations of the Earth. He wrote:
“[It is] called the house of Evil Daemon, because it injures the emanation from the stars in
it to the Earth and is also declining, and the thick, misty exhalations from the moistures of
the Earth creates such turbidity and, as it were, obscurity, that the stars do not appear in
either their true colours or magnitudes.”5
An additional factor is that, with the rising of the Sun, stars inside this area
are within the boundaries of invisibility from which they are yet to be
released in their heliacal rising. In such a condition planets are considered
‘combust’ or ‘under the Sun’s beams’, their lack of visibility being implicit
of weakness and poor expression. The 12th house, as well as the condition of
combustion, can both be used to symbolise imprisonment.
All of these debilitating factors, augmented by the association with
Saturn, have been invested into the meaning of the 12th house. Not
surprisingly it has gathered up many aspects of misfortune in its
signification, primarily derived from the sense of weakness and invisibility.
It may symbolise matters that have not yet reached a point of maturity where
they can be fully understood, or for other reasons there may be a sense that
open expression is denied, possibly because of a danger of misunderstanding
or resentment from others. Traditionally it has a strong emphasis upon slaves
and slavery, and hostility from those who plot against us secretly (as
opposed to those who make an open, direct attack, who are represented by
the 7th). But this is also a house of ‘self-undoing’, indicating where we need
to exercise particular caution and self-reflection in order to avoid acting

<<<PAGE 72>>>
against our own best interests. Within natal interpretation, it is often
perceived as an area of internalisation, concerned with the processing of
painful emotions such as guilt, fear or alienation. In recognition of its
traditional sense of darkness and weakness, some see it as reflective of
karmic hangovers or sacrificial life-missions, or a place where we must learn
to simply bear the burdens that are not easily overcome.
The Sixth House
In the symbolism of the ancients, entrance to the underworld has taken place
in the 6th house and the process of penance has begun. The 6th house is the
temple of Mars, Nergal to the Mesopotamians, who represented to them the
feared lord of the underworld and the author of pestilence and disease.
Firmicus tells us that it is an unfortunate house because of its rulership by
Mars, but its cadency and lack of aspect to the ascendant have also played a
major part.
Like the 12th, the 6th house was perceived as a hostile area, full of
misery, labour and toil, and specifically related to matters of illness and
disease. Anciently, it was said to represent slavery, but perhaps in a milder
form than that of the 12th, since its traditional rulership is primarily
concerned with servants, maids and labourers, or the mundane chores
performed out of necessity.
Many modem astrologers, being aware that the 6th house rules labour
and toil, often over-emphasise its influence in career matters and
professional concerns; yet the words ‘profession’ and ‘career’ suggest a
striving towards betterment which is properly represented by the midheaven.
The 6th is concerned with drudgery and holds no promise of advancement.
To use such words undermines the negativity of the area and the physical
restraint it places upon us. The fact that servants were attributed here is a
reflection of the level of respect they commanded – they were paid to do the
menial tasks that others sought to avoid if possible. The work that is
symbolised by the 6th is performed out of need. Employers have no
relevance here, though employees clearly do.
The 6th house does however, have some signification for those
professions that demand a great deal of poorly rewarded hard work. It also
rules professions that are directly involved with illness and disease, and we
find in traditional aphorisms that Mars in conjunction with Venus in this
house is an argument for a good physician.6 Jerome Cardan recognized the

<<<PAGE 73>>>
sphere of Mars as relevant to the study of medicine; possibly because
traditional medicine could be so painful and surgery was often compared
with butchery; but still, it offers another interesting reflection upon the fact
that Mars finds its joy in this house.
There is a widespread tendency to refer to the 6th house as ‘the house of
health’, with examples of this occurring even in the classical period. But this
is poor terminology since the significations of this house represent the
factors that afflict our health. Health and vitality is described by the first
house, illness by the 6th. In decumbiture we evaluate whether the 1st house
ruler is a stronger, more effective planet than the 6th house ruler, in order to
judge whether the patient has the innate strength and vitality to overcome the
afflicting disease.
Our animals are also represented by the 6th house, especially smaller
forms of cattle which reinforces the link with farming and agriculture which
became popular in the medieval period. The origin of this rulership is
derived from the perception of animals as beasts – especially ‘beasts of
burden’ whereby any animal kept by a human owner, whether domesticated
or not, is to some extent refused the liberty of those that exist in the wild.
Lilly states that the 6th rules all manner of lesser cattle and small beasts,
while the 12th rules ‘great cattle’ such as horses, oxen and elephants. Ezra
offers a basis for the distinction, saying that the 12th rules all animals which
serve as a mount for man,7 suggesting that the association is based upon
levels of servility and mastership, and emphasising the connotation that this
axis bears to the restriction of liberty and free will. But larger animals also
generated fear in communities less controlled than ours, provoking a sense
of vulnerability we could only imagine if the animals we happily visit in
zoos and enclosures were encountered in the wild.
6th House Associations Through History
Manilius:
Temple of ill-omen, misery, bane and toil. Hostile to
future activity. Doomed to fall.
Others
(classical):
Slaves, toil, illness, infirmity; enmity, ‘bad fortune’.
Firmicus:
Health: physical infirmities and sickness. Called Mala

<<<PAGE 74>>>
Fortune because it is the house of Mars. Debilitated
and passive because it does not aspect the ascendant.
Al-Biruni:
Sickness, defects of the body, overwork. If
unfortunate: loss of property, disease of internal
organs; slaves, maids and cattle.
Lilly:
Sickness and disease. Servants, labourers. Farmers,
farming and cattle. Small animals.
Modern:
Work; subordinates. Domestic chores. Health.
Most ‘missing animal’ horaries drawn by traditional astrologers related
to cattle, where the concern was commercial and there was no emotional
bond between the animal and its owner. William Lilly appears to have done
few of them; he apologises for having no example horaries relating to
straying cattle since he worked within the environs of London where such
concerns were rare, adding “only I once set the figure preceding concerning
a dog (who is in the nature of small beasts)”.8 His contemporary William
Ramesey clearly reveals the disdain by which the association arose:
“The Sixth house is the Cadent from the North Angle,9 and is in order the sixth house
from the Ascendant: it beholds not the Ascendant; it hath therefore signification of
sicknesses, of what kind soever it be; it hath also signification of Servants, Bond-men and
women, and Slaves; and of Cattle of the smaller sort for the same reason, as having no
loving familiarity or correspondency with the Ascendant in friendship, &c”.10
The attribution of pets to the 6th house is one that faces no challenge in
modern astrology. It seems to have found universal agreement and I have
used it on many occasions for pet-related horaries and have found the
signification reliable. Yet this is one area where the link between the
philosophical origin of the attribution and modern expectations of it has lost
its continuity. No element of 6th house symbolism, traditional or modern,
truly expresses the basis of our concern over pets that are loved, unless we
admit the notion of domesticity to imply servile obedience.

<<<PAGE 75>>>
7
HOUSE RULERSHIPS IN PRACTICE
The First House
Main Rulerships: Life, vitality and health. Stature, colour, complexion,
form and shape of body. Older sources note its influence upon the intellect,
the way the mind works, and speech. In general, the first house represents
the focal point for the personality and manner of expression. As well as
describing the physical appearance, the condition of this house and that of
its planetary ruler indicates the level of personal charisma, will, and
emotional strength.
In Horary Astrology: The querent in any question, or the collective of
which the querent is a part, ie., in questions such as ‘will we win?’, it
signifies the querent’s team. If a question is asked regarding a mundane
situation in which the querent is not personally involved but has a strong
sympathy and inclination, then use the 1st house to represent the party the

<<<PAGE 76>>>
querent favours and supports. In questions regarding war, for example, the
1st house signifies the querent’s own country, since they identify with the
concerns of their country when the question is expressed.
Questions regarding the safety or well being of something or someone
having no relationship to the querent are assigned directly to the ascendant.
This effectively takes the querent out of the horary and is used where the
querent has no involvement in the situation; for example, ‘will the missing
person I read about be found alive?’, ‘is the ship safe or has it been sunk?’.
The rule applies where the question is asked out of sympathetic concern. If
the question regards an enemy of the state or someone the querent feels
opposed to (for example, ‘will the escaped murderer be caught?’, ‘will the
invaders be successful?’) it doesn’t apply – particular or general enemies
are signified by the 7th house.
In Mundane Astrology: The common people or general state of the nation.
The country and its inhabitants as a whole; its general condition of
prosperity and health or the reverse.
In Lawsuits or Conflicts: Whoever initiates the action. For the
commencement of a trial, the prosecution.
In Events: Generally it signifies whoever makes the first move; in
business, who makes the proposal; in war, who makes the first offence; in
games, the home team.
In Medical Matters: The head and face: eyes, ears, mouth, hair, nose,
tongue, teeth; Culpeper notes: “whatsoever is above the first vertebra of the
neck”.1
Saturn, Mars or the north node in this house denote a blemish in the
face, or in the part of the body represented by the sign on the cusp; Lilly
notes:
“as if Aries be in the ascendant, the mark, mole, or scar is without fail in the head or
face; and if few degrees of the sign ascend, the mark is in the upper part of the head; if
the middle of the sign be on the cusp, the mole, mark or scar is in the middle of the face,
or near it; if the later degrees ascend, the face is blemished near the chin, towards the
neck”.2

<<<PAGE 77>>>
In decumbiture charts the 1st house represents the patient, whilst the
condition of its ruler shows the strength of their vitality – as opposed to the
6th house ruler which represents the disease. If the 1st house ruler is
stronger than the 6th, the patient will overcome the illness.
In Commerce: The buyer.
Colours: White and pale colours. Lilly notes:
“Of colours, it hath the white; that is, if a planet be in this house that hath signification of
white, the complexion of the party is more pale, white or wan; or if you enquire after the
colour of the clothes of any man, if his significator be in the first house, and in a sign
corresponding, the party’s apparel is white or grey, or somewhat near that colour, so also
if the question be for cattle, when their significators are found in this house, it denotes
them to be of that colour or near it”.3
Qualities: Cardinal, masculine, diurnal.
Direction: East.
Associated Planets and Signs: Mercury has its joy in the 1st; Lilly notes:
“because it represents the head, and he the tongue, fancy and memory: when he is well
dignified and posited in this house, he produces good orators”.4
Aries and Saturn are co-significators, of which Lilly writes:
“for as this house is the first house, so is Aries the first sign, and Saturn the first of the
planets; and therefore when Saturn is but moderately well fortified in this house, and in
any benevolent aspect of Jupiter, Venus, Sun or Moon, it promises a good sober
constitution of body, and usually long life”.5
Names: The Eastern angle, Ascendant (‘what is rising’), Horoscope (‘hour
watcher’), Anatole (‘east/sunrise’); House of Life.
The Second House
Main Rulerships: Resources, material comforts, earnings and all issues
concerning wealth or of a financial nature. The manner of attaining wealth
(note sign on cusp, planetary ruler and its condition). Personal goods and
belongings, assets, income, gain, money lent to others, profit (or loss when

<<<PAGE 78>>>
afflicted), supporters and assistance from others. Succedent houses
generally show the resources and support given to the preceding angle, ie.,
the 5th will show the financial status and assistants of the father, the 8th
will show the wealth of the partner and the enemy’s resources and
supporters, and the 11th will show the friends and supporters of whoever is
in power and the profit to be made from the business.
In Horary Astrology: The querent’s finances and assets; any personal or
‘moveable’ possession (real estate or property falls under the rulership of
the 4th house, although the 2nd house is still relevant in showing the
financial implications of property deals). If someone asks about the
financial prospects of selling their car this is a 2nd house matter concerning
a personal possession; in other matters cars generally fall under the
rulership of the 3rd house of day-to-day travel issues. In lost property
questions, use the 2nd house and its ruler to signify the missing item.
Always be aware of the condition of the 2nd house and its ruler in any
question where money is important – where a financial agreement is sought,
a strong 2nd house ruler applying to good aspects indicates financial benefit
to the querent, but a weak 2nd-ruler and strong 8th-ruler suggests a loss for
the querent and gain for the other party. This is equally true in questions
relating to gambling and stocks and shares. See the 8th house for issues
relating to loans.
In Mundane Astrology: The nation’s assets and financial status. The
treasury, the exchequer, revenue and all places and activities concerned with
money-making; such as banks, the stock exchange, financial institutions,
money markets and trade. Exports and money lent to other nations. Ibn Ezra
placed food under this house and we may assume that in mundane charts it
influences the status and value of the nation’s crops, produce, general
resources and essential supplies.
In Lawsuits or Conflicts: In war charts this house shows allies and
supporters of whoever initiates the conflict; their ammunition and
resources.
In Lawsuits: Friends, assistants, witnesses and those who act as a resource
for the prosecution.

<<<PAGE 79>>>
In Events: As above applied to whoever initiates the action.
In Medical Matters: The throat and neck, down towards the shoulders.
In Commerce: The financial status of the buyer.
Colours: Green.
Qualities: Succedent, feminine, nocturnal.
Direction: East-north-east.
Associated Planets and Signs: No planet rejoices in this house. Co-
significators are Jupiter and Taurus. Lilly notes:
“if Jupiter be placed in this house, or be lord hereof, it is an argument of an estate or
fortune. Sun and Mars are never well placed in this house, either of them show
dispersion of substance, according to the capacity and quality of him that is either born
or asks the questions”.6
The Sun ruling the 2nd is not such an affliction.
Names: Anaphora (‘rising up’): House of Wealth and Substance.
The Third House
Main Rulerships: Brothers and sisters, cousins or general members of the
family (not parents, they belong to the 4th house). Neighbours and our local
neighbourhood. The environment in which we live and work. Short
journeys or travel made on a regular basis. Lilly says,“as he may go and
come in a day, or at least on the next”7 and notes that this house shows a
propensity for “oft removing from one place to another”.8
Letters, rumours, reports, messages and messengers. Communications
generally. Newspapers, magazines, telephones, postal service. Written
deeds and contracts. Speeches and debates. Our ability to express ourselves
and communicate to others. Languages, mobility skills and self-expression.
In Horary Astrology: As above applied to the querent. In questions of a
financial or business nature, an affliction to the 3rd house warns of

<<<PAGE 80>>>
difficulties in contracts and written deeds. In relationship charts, it suggests
communication problems or mental incompatibility – Mars in the 3rd can
show arguments and cross words; Saturn, an inability to communicate. Ivy
Goldstein-Jacobson states that it is the house of gossips and visitors, and
that a malefic in the 3rd can show an unwelcome visitor or unwanted
delivery.9
In Mundane Astrology: National rumours, propaganda. The press and
press releases. All means of disseminating news and information such as
the post office, communication networks, computers, telephones, faxes,
newspapers, magazines, emails, publications, literature, periodicals and
television.
The transport system and all means of inland transit, locomotion or
communication, such as railways, road and river traffic, cars, underground
networks, etc.
The education system, although where this effects children it is also
represented by the 5th house. Public opinion and issues concerning freedom
of speech; international and common languages. It also rules neighbouring
nations and documents that relate to international agreements.
In Lawsuits or Conflicts: In lawsuits this house relates to writs, contracts
and deeds that affect the prosecution. It also signifies all written statements
and the ability to affect the situation through letters and correspondence. In
war charts it represents the propaganda of the initiator.
In Events: As above, related to whoever initiates the action. Barbara
Watters notes:
“if very afflicted it may indicate that he who makes an offer or proposes something is
lying”.10
In Medical Matters: The shoulders, arms, hands and fingers.
In Commerce: Written reports, deeds, contracts affecting the purchase.
Colours: Orange.
Qualities: Cadent, masculine, nocturnal.
