# source: _OceanofPDF.com_The_Art_of_Predictive_Astrology_Forecasting_Your_Life_Events_-_Carol_Rushman.pdf
# pages: 1-80
# compiled into: transits.json (western stack)
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 1>>>

<<<PAGE 2>>>
BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
Copley  Square 
Boston,  MA  02116 

<<<PAGE 3>>>
THE  C??/  OF 
PREDICTIVE 

<<<PAGE 4>>>
About  the  Author 
Carol  Rushman  has  been  a  professional  astrologer— teaching,  lec- 
turing, and  doing  private  consultations— for  over  thirty  years.  Her 
clients  include  television  personalities,  movie  stars,  politicians, 
musicians,  and  business  people  from  all  over  the  world,  as  well  as 
many  of  her  professional  peers.  Carol  has  taught  and  lectured  ex- 
tensively serving  on  the  faculty  of  several  national  conferences, 
and  representing  the  United  States  at  an  international  conference 
in  Sydney,  Australia. 
She  was  a  board  member  of  the  American  Federation  of  As- 
trologers, the  American  Federation  of  Astrology  Network,  and  the 
Wisconsin  Astrological  Society  and  was  also  a  member  of  the  In- 
ternational Society  of  Astrologers  and  the  National  Council  for 
Geocosmic  Research.  Carol  has  appeared  on  television  and  radio  in 
New  York,  Hong  Kong,  Los  Angeles,  Boston,  Atlanta,  and  Chicago, 
as  well  as  locally  in  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin,  where  she  was  featured 
in  a  documentary  called  "The  Making  of  an  Astrologer."  In  addi- 
tion, she  has  had  several  of  her  own  radio  and  telvision  shows. 
Carol  currently  resides  in  Bayside,  Wisconsin,  with  her  hus- 
band. Dr.  Jay  Meili.  She  is  at  work  on  a  new  book  on  the  astrology 
of  relationships. 
To  Write  to  the  Author 
If  you  wish  to  contact  the  author  or  would  like  more  information 
about  this  book,  please  write  to  the  author  in  care  of  Llewellyn 
Worldwide  and  we  will  forward  your  request.  Both  the  author 
and  publisher  appreciate  hearing  from  you.  Llewellyn  Worldwide 
cannot  guarantee  that  every  letter  written  to  the  author  can  be  an- 
swered, but  all  will  be  forwarded.  Please  write  to: 
Carol  Rushman  %  Llewellyn  Worldwide 
P.O.  Box  64383,  Dept.  0-7387-0164-5 
St.  Paul,  MN  55164-0383,  U.S.A. 
Please  enclose  a  self-addressed  stamped  envelope  for  reply,  or  $1.00  to  cover 
costs.  If  outside  U.S.A.,  enclose  international  postal  reply  coupon. 
Please  visit  our  website  at  http:  /  /  www.llewellyn.com. 

<<<PAGE 5>>>
(]AROL 
pORECASTING  yOUR 
ypE  gVENTS 
2002 
Llewellyn  Publications 
St.  Paul,  Minnesota  55164-0383,  U.S.A. 

<<<PAGE 6>>>
The  Art  of  Predictive  Astrology:  Forecasting  Your  Life  Events  ©  2002  by  Carol  Rushman.  All 
rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book  may  be  used  or  reproduced  in  any  manner  whatso- 
ever, including  Internet  usage,  without  written  permission  from  Llewellyn  Publications 
except  in  the  case  of  brief  quotations  embodied  in  critical  articles  and  reviews. 
First  Edition 
First  Printing,  2002 
Book  design  by  Donna  Burch 
Cover  design  by  Kevin  R.  Brown 
Editing  by  Andrea  Neff 
Library  of  Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data 
Rushman,  Carol. 
The  art  of  predictive  astrology  :  forecasting  your  life  events  /  Carol  Rushman. — 1st  ed. 
p.  cm. 
Includes  bibliographical  references  and  index. 
ISBN  0-7387-0164-5 
1 .  Predictive  astrology.  I.  Title. 
BF1720.5  .R87  2002 
133.5— dc21  2001050413 
Llewellyn  Worldwide  does  not  participate  in,  endorse,  or  have  any  authority  or  respon- 
sibility concerning  private  business  transactions  between  our  authors  and  the  public. 
All  mail  addressed  to  the  author  is  forwarded  but  the  publisher  cannot,  unless  specifi- 
cally instructed  by  the  author,  give  out  an  address  or  phone  number. 
Any  Internet  references  contained  in  this  work  are  current  at  publication  time,  but  the 
publisher  cannot  guarantee  that  a  specific  location  will  continue  to  be  maintained.  Please 
refer  to  the  publisher's  website  for  links  to  authors'  websites  and  other  sources. 
Llewellyn  Publications 
A  Division  of  Llewellyn  Worldwide,  Ltd. 
PO.  Box  64383,  Dept.  0-7387-0164-5 
St.  Paul,  MN  55164-0383,  U.S.A. 
www.llewellyn.com 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 

<<<PAGE 7>>>
I  dedicate  this  hook  to  my  husband,  Jay  Meili, 
who  supports  me  in  all  my  endeavors 
and  makes  anything  possible. 

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Acknowledgments 
special  thanks  to  Dennis  Ghetto  and  Hildegard  Van  Deusen  for 
their  writing  and  editing  expertise,  to  Alex  Bunshank  and  Toni  Paris 
for  their  many  hours  spent  transcribing  my  many  lectures  and 
teaching  tapes  and  transcripts,  and  to  my  daughter  Renee  Tazalla 
who  spent  so  many  hours  on  the  computer  helping  me  organize 
my  work.  Td  also  like  to  thank  my  dear  friend  Janis  Robedeaux  who 
started  me  on  my  spiritual  path,  and  also  my  teacher  and  mentor 
Norman  Arens. 
Special  thanks  and  gratitude  to  my  mother,  Cecilia  Serio,  to  my 
children  Denise,  Roger,  Lisa,  Renee,  and  Leslie,  to  my  stepchildren 
Paige,  Robin,  and  Brett,  and  to  all  my  many  friends  and  clients 
who  have  had  such  interesting  lives  and  who  shared  their  stories 
with  me.  Also,  many  thanks  to  Andrea  NefF,  my  editor,  who  did  an 
outstanding  job.  I  thank  you  all. 

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Contents 
Introduction 
xi 
Chapter  1 
Psychological  Profiles 
1 
Chapter  2 
The  Natal  Promise 
29 
Chapter  3 
Progressions 
71 
Chapter  4 
The  Importance  of  the  Progressed  Moon 
91 
Chapter  5 
Progressed  House  Cusps 
135 
Chapter  6 
Transits 
151 

<<<PAGE 10>>>
X    /  Contents 
Chapter  7 
Stationing  and  Retrograde  Planets 
183 
Chapter  8 
Lunations  and  Eclipses 
201 
Chapter  9 
Putting  It  All  Together 
253 
Glossary 
263 
Reading  List 
269 
Index 
271 
Horoscopes 
1.  Carol  Rushman  ...  37 
2.  Jacqueline  Kennedy  Onassis  .  . .  39 
3.  Ron  Howard  .  .  .  63 
4.  Young  Man — Natal  Chart ...  255 
5.  Young  Man — Founding  of  Company ...  257 
6.  Young  Man — Sale  of  Company . . .  261 

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Introduction 
In  thirty  years  of  working  as  a  professional  astrologer,  I  find 
that  the  predictive  part  of  astrology  is  by  far  the  most  exciting. 
There  was  a  time  when  predictive  astrology  was  not  the  thing 
to  do.  It  was  the  1970s  and  astrologers  were  using  their  exper- 
tise strictly  as  a  psychological  tool.  Psychology  is  certainly  im- 
portant and  interesting,  and  it  definitely  plays  a  very  important 
part  in  what  we  do,  but  prediction  is  what  clients  want.  I  have 
many  psychologists  who  come  to  me  because  they,  too,  want 
to  know  what's  going  to  happen.  Astrology's  insight  into  the 
future  is  part  of  the  intrigue  and  mystery  that  draws  people  to 
it.  The  most  popular  astrologers  with  great  followings  know 
how  to  make  timely  and  accurate  predictions. 
When  you  are  a  new  astrologer,  there  is  nothing  like  making 
your  first  prediction.  I  can  remember  mine  very  clearly.  I  told  a 
friend  who  was  waiting  to  hear  from  a  lover  (she  had  not  heard 
from  him  for  five  weeks)  that  word  would  come  Thursday. 
When  she  called  me  that  Thursday  evening,  I  don't  know  which 
of  us  was  more  amazed.  He  had  called.  There  was  no  thrill 
quite  like  it.  That  was  over  thirty  years  ago. 
xi 

<<<PAGE 12>>>
xii    /  Introduction 
In  my  intermediate  and  advanced  classes,  I  ask  students  to 
make  predictions  for  themselves  for  the  coming  week.  I  have 
them  work  with  their  own  chart.  Some  weeks  the  students  have 
only  minor  events  to  look  at.  Nonetheless,  I  encourage  them  to 
figure  out  something  that's  going  to  happen.  It  may  be  an  im- 
portant phone  call,  or  something  as  simple  as  someone  paying 
them  a  compliment.  It  may  just  be  a  good  hair  day  But  I  want 
them  to  predict  something,  say  it  out  loud,  and  then  watch  it 
happen.  When  it  transpires,  they  are  just  as  thrilled  as  I  am. 
Eventually,  my  students  move  on.  In  doing  so  they  must  de- 
cide what  astrological  system  they  will  use.  A  personal  method 
is  essential  in  counseling  clients.  It  gives  astrologers  a  structure, 
congruency  and  a  consistency  in  their  work.  Clients  appreciate 
all  three.  What  is  most  important  is  that  each  astrologer  be 
comfortable  with  his  or  her  own  system. 
Perhaps  because  my  Sun  is  in  Virgo  and  I  have  Capricorn  ris- 
ing, I  believe  in  structures  and  systems  more  than  the  average 
person.  I  believe  astrologers  must  lay  a  firm  foundation  before 
they  can  teach  or  counsel,  so  Tm  presenting  this  material  in  a 
very  pragmatic  manner.  It  doesn't  matter  what  particular  sys- 
tem astrologers  use,  but  they  should  have  an  outline  that  they 
faithfully  follow  if  they  are  going  to  help  their  clients.  It  will 
make  both  the  astrologer  and  the  client  feel  secure. 
It  is  also  important  that  there  be  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  a 
conclusion  to  each  counseling  session.  This  is  so  both  the  client 
and  the  astrologer  feel  complete  when  the  client  leaves.  I  prefer 
my  clients  to  consult  with  me  just  once  a  year  because  then 
every  session  is  full  and  worthwhile.  Only  if  there  is  an  impor- 
tant issue  during  the  year  do  I  encourage  them  to  come  more 
often.  I  don't  want  astrology  to  be  a  crutch  for  anyone.  I  think  it 
is  dangerous  for  astrologers  to  establish  themselves  as  gurus  or 
present  themselves  as  people  who  have  all  the  answers. 
My  system  begins  with  the  natal  chart  and  with  what  I  call 
the  natal  promise.  The  natal  promise  is  the  total  of  all  the  chart 

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Introduction    /  xiii 
components  that,  when  combined,  show  each  life's  potential. 
All  may  not  be  realized.  For  example,  a  client's  natal  promise 
might  show  the  potential  for  several  marriages,  but  he  or  she 
may  choose  to  marry  only  once.  But,  it  is  in  that  potential — that 
natal  promise — that  all  astrological  predicting  begins.  Without 
an  understanding  of  the  natal  chart  and  what  it  promises,  pre- 
dictions won  t  manifest. 
Next,  in  order  to  time  predictions  accurately,  astrologers  must 
understand  the  psychological  makeup  of  their  clients,  because 
people  respond  to  energy  differently  and  their  profiles  will  show 
you  the  differences.  The  difference  in  consulting  a  predominantly 
fixed  client  compared  to  a  cardinal  one  is  enormous. 
For  timing,  I  use  secondary  progressions,  which  I  outline 
below,  with  an  added  emphasis  on  the  progressed  Moon  and 
the  progressed  house  cusps.  I  look  at  progressed  planets  aspect- 
ing  progressed  and  natal  planets.  I  also  do  a  lot  of  work  with 
transits  and  stationing  planets,  with  a  special  emphasis  on  the 
lunations  (New  Moons  and  Full  Moons)  and  eclipses.  This  is 
my  system,  and  it  has  served  me  well  for  three  decades.  I  follow 
a  logical  order,  which  helps  me  feel  organized  and  comfortable.  I 
encourage  each  astrologer  who  reads  this  book  to  do  the  same. 
Again,  here  is  my  method: 
1.  Natal  Chart 
I  look  at  the  natal  chart  to  determine  what  drives  each 
client.  I  look  at  his  or  her  psychological  makeup,  which  is 
indicated  by  the  chart.  I  evaluate  what  is  promised. 
2.  Secondary  Progressions 
a.  The  progressed  Moon 
b.  Progressed  planets  aspecting  natal  planets 
c.  Progressed  planets  aspecting  progressed  planets 
d.  Progressed  house  cusps  aspecting  both  natal  and  pro- 
gressed planets 

<<<PAGE 14>>>
xiv    /  Introduction 
3.  Transiting  Planets 
I  look  next  at  the  movement  of  the  planets  through  the 
signs  and  houses,  and  the  aspects,  or  relationships,  they 
make  to  the  natal  and  progressed  planets,  with  a  special 
emphasis  on  the  stationing  planets. 
4.  Lunations  and  Eclipses 
The  New  Moons,  Full  Moons,  and  eclipses  are  extremely 
important  in  timing  events  and  also  in  evaluating  what  a 
client  is  working  on  at  the  time  of  consultation. 
While  this  system  is  not  complicated,  it  is  thorough,  and  a 
competent  astrologer  can  get  what  is  needed  for  a  good  and 
accurate  reading. 
I  think  interpreting  a  chart  is  like  playing  the  card  game 
bridge.  There  are  some  very  good  bridge  players  who  under- 
stand all  the  many  tools  and  techniques,  but  they  use  only  the 
very  best  ones.  There  are  other  bridge  players  who  try  to  incor- 
porate all  of  the  conventions  and  techniques  of  the  game,  and 
end  up  confusing  themselves  and  their  partners.  This  can  also  be 
true  of  astrologers.  I  have  seen  astrology  charts  that  had  so 
much  information  written  on  them  that  I  couldn't  read  them.  In 
my  mind,  a  good  basic  understanding  of  astrology  and  the  afore- 
mentioned techniques  is  all  that  is  needed.  Good  astrologers 
learn  it  all  and  then  select  the  best  system  for  themselves  after 
much  experimentation  and  research. 

<<<PAGE 15>>>
Chapter  One 
Psychological  Profiles 
hen  I  started  in  astrology  years  ago,  I  noticed  that  it  was 
very  hard  for  me  to  pinpoint  timing  in  my  predictions.  People  re- 
sponded very  differently  to  the  exact  same  energy  Astrology  is  the 
study  of  how  we  deal  with,  experience,  and  respond  to  energy 
Sometimes  we  experience  the  energy  as  an  inner  need  or  desire  to 
make  a  change,  take  a  chance,  or  do  something  new  or  different — 
this  is  stimulated  by  a  conjunction.  Sometimes  the  energy  emerges 
as  an  obstacle,  a  blockage,  a  challenge,  or  an  opportunity — this  is 
demonstrated  with  a  square  aspect.  With  an  opposition,  it  may  be 
a  crisis  in  a  relationship  or  a  learning  experience  through  another 
person.  The  aspects,  transits,  progressions,  lunations,  and  eclipses 
in  a  client's  chart  create  energy,  but  we  all  respond  to  that  energy 
very  differently. 
To  better  pinpoint  when  things  were  most  likely  to  happen,  I 
went  back  to  the  basics.  By  examining  the  elemental  placements 
1 

<<<PAGE 16>>>
2    /    Psychological  Profiles 
(fire,  earth,  air,  and  water)  and  the  modality  placements  (cardinal, 
fixed,  and  mutable),  and  some  of  each  client's  predominant  psy- 
chological patterns,  I  found  I  could  refine  my  timing  of  predic- 
tions. From  that  point  on,  I  started  all  my  chart  work  by  looking 
at  these  components.  These  two  factors — modalities  and  ele- 
ments— ^began  to  reveal  a  pattern  of  how  each  individual  responds 
to  a  given  situation. 
The  Four  Elements 
The  four  elements  are  fire,  earth,  air,  and  water.  They  tell  an  as- 
trologer much  about  a  client's  temperament.  An  abundance  or 
lack  of  an  element  will  show  how  a  personality  manifests  itself 
Certainly  the  signs  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant  are  in  lend 
prominence  to  each  persons  temperament  or  psychological 
makeup,  but  a  stellium  (group)  of  four  planets  in  an  element  also 
has  a  very  noticeable  impact  on  a  person  s  response  to  energy.  The 
combination  of  elements  in  any  chart  defines  the  personality  and 
nature  of  the  individual. 
Fire  Signs 
Fire  signs  respond  to  energy  very  quickly  and  directly,  with  no 
holds  barred.  They  can  be  impulsive,  ardent,  and  spontaneous. 
They  favor  action  and  activity.  They  are  also  ready  to  go  some- 
place, do  something,  create  something,  or  be  somebody  This  is 
particularly  true  of  Aries  and  Sagittarius,  but  even  Leos,  with  their 
fixity,  have  a  strong,  adventurous  spirit  and,  of  course,  the  most 
confidence  in  the  world.  All  fire  signs  are  willing  to  take  a  risk, 
start  something  new,  begin  a  new  project,  start  their  own  busi- 
ness, or  embark  on  a  trip.  Fire-sign  people  are  also  confident  and 
have  high  self-esteem.  They  get  involved,  and  they  approach  life 
with  tremendous  zest  and  enthusiasm. 
Earth  Signs 
Earth  signs  are  more  cautious  in  their  approach  to  energy.  Earth- 
sign  people  are  more  practical  than  the  other  elements,  more  real- 

<<<PAGE 17>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  3 
istic,  and  more  inclined  to  need  solid  footing  before  they  can  go 
forward.  They  take  a  more  cautious,  conservative,  deliberate  ap- 
proach. Taureans  dig  in  their  heels  and  really  ponder  things.  Vir- 
gos  want  to  analyze.  Capricorns,  while  they  want  to  climb  the  lad- 
der, do  it  with  care.  They  need  a  vision,  a  plan,  and  an  organized 
structure  before  starting  their  ascent.  Earth  signs  need  to  be  pre- 
pared. They  are  dependable,  thorough,  and  solid. 
Air  Signs 
Air  signs  approach  energy  mentally.  They  are  people-oriented,  so- 
cial, and  seek  knowledge.  They  are  always  ready  to  start  a  new  re- 
lationship or  friendship,  and  they  love  learning  situations.  They 
bore  easily  and  sometimes  talk  and  think  about  things  more  than 
they  actually  do  them.  Geminis  have  great  intellectual  curiosity. 
They  will  enter  into  a  learning  situation  at  the  drop  of  a  hat,  but 
their  native  duality  is  tricky.  Anyone  who  lives  with  a  Gemini  will 
tell  you  that  it's  hard  to  know  which  one  of  the  Gemini's  many 
personalities  is  getting  out  of  bed  in  the  morning.  Librans  are 
partnership-driven.  They  need  a  relationship,  love  to  be  in  love, 
and  fall  in  love  frequently  Nothing,  will  stop  an  Aquarian  when  he 
or  she  has  a  cause  or  passion.  Aquarians  need  to  express  their 
uniqueness.  They  need  freedom,  are  very  independent,  and  some 
feel  they  need  to  leave  their  mark  on  the  world.  Air  signs  are  com- 
municative, social,  and  into  ideas  and  other  people. 
Water  Signs 
Water  signs  respond  to  energy  almost  unconsciously.  They  emo- 
tionally float  into  and  out  of  situations.  They  respond  to  energy 
without  even  knowing  they  are  doing  it.  I  have  a  water-sign 
daughter  who  has  seven  planets  in  this  element.  When  she  was 
younger,  I  saw  her  emotionally  drift  into  situations,  relationships, 
and  careers  in  a  way  that  seemed  to  be  without  a  lot  of  thought. 
As  she  matured,  this  became  less  apparent.  Water  signs  move  with 
whatever  is  going  on.  Cancers  are  motivated  to  nurture  and  be 
nurtured.  They  only  really  find  out  who  they  are  when  they  have 
a  home  and  someone  to  take  care  of  Cancers  often  have  issues 

<<<PAGE 18>>>
4    /    Psychological  Profiles 
with  getting  pregnant  and  having  children.  They  either  get  preg- 
nant too  easily  or  they  can't  get  pregnant  at  all,  or  they  get  preg- 
nant when  they're  not  married,  or  when  they  are  married  they 
can't  conceive.  The  Cancer  astrologers  I  know  are  real  caretakers. 
Katherine  de  Jersey,  a  Cancer,  is  one  of  the  most  concerned  as- 
trologers I  have  ever  met. 
Scorpios  have  intense  vision.  They  don't  look  to  the  right  or 
the  left,  but  flow  straight  ahead  with  laserlike  focus.  Nothing  stops 
a  Scorpio  when  he  or  she  wants  something.  When  this  happens,  I 
warn  my  clients  to  get  out  of  the  way. 
Pisces  are  the  trickiest  to  describe.  Their  energy  is  chameleon- 
like and  absorbing.  I  advise  my  clients  whose  children  have  a  lot  of 
Pisces  (or  even  sometimes  a  lot  of  mutable  influences)  to  make  sure 
their  children  have  the  most  positive,  constructive  environment  and 
friends  possible  because  they  will  adapt  or  adjust  to  whatever 
they're  exposed  to.  They  need  to  be  in  an  uplifting  environment, 
because  if  they  get  in  with  the  wrong  companions,  they  could  fol- 
low the  crowd.  Pisces  people,  or  those  with  strong  Neptune  influ- 
ences, are  often  affected  by  the  moods  of  others  around  them.  My 
Sun  is  conjunct  Neptune  in  Virgo.  If  my  husband  is  negative  or  de- 
pressed about  something,  I  slide  from  being  happy  to  being  in  the 
pits.  If  I'm  around  someone  who  is  in  a  bad  mood,  a  sunny  day 
can  turn  to  gloom,  and  my  parade  is  sure  to  be  rained  on.  I  have  a 
girlfriend  with  the  Sun  in  Pisces  who  has  found  that  she  cannot  be 
around  negative  people.  She  confessed  to  me  that  she  had  to  stop 
seeing  a  mutual  friend  of  ours  because  every  time  she  was  with 
that  person  she  was  depressed  afterwards.  Pisceans  have  porous 
psyches.  They  pick  up  and  take  on  the  moods  of  other  people  and 
must  be  careful  about  who  they  spend  time  with.  In  general,  all 
water  signs  are  fluid  and  will  go  wherever  their  emotions  take  them. 
Lack  of  an  Element 
A  lack  of  any  element  in  a  chart  creates  challenges  for  the  person 
and  the  way  he  or  she  reacts  to  energy.  These  people  either  strug- 
gle to  compensate  in  order  to  have  a  balanced  response  to  life,  or 

<<<PAGE 19>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  5 
they  have  no  idea  that  something  is  missing  from  their  personality. 
If  fire  is  lacking,  these  people  may  have  low  self-esteem  and  little 
confidence.  They  may  be  pessimistic,  easily  depressed,  and  lack 
buoyancy  of  spirit.  Those  without  earth  in  their  chart  may  lack 
practicality  and  grounding.  One  of  my  friends  who  has  no  earth 
in  his  chart  constantly  struggles  to  keep  his  feet  on  the  ground. 
He  always  says  that  he  has  money  for  all  of  the  luxuries  of  life,  but 
none  of  the  necessities.  He  has  been  known  to  buy  luxury  items 
instead  of  paying  his  rent. 
People  with  a  lack  of  air  have  trouble  being  objective  and  tend 
to  internalize  everything.  They  hunger  for  social  interaction,  but 
aren  t  very  good  at  it.  I  have  a  friend  who  has  no  air  and  an  annoy- 
ing tendency  to  lecture.  He  wants  his  companion  to  sit  and  listen, 
isn  t  good  at  verbal  chitchat,  and  has  trouble  with  social  repartee. 
He's  most  interested  in  his  own  point  of  view.  People  who  lack 
water  try  to  fill  the  emotional  vacuum.  It's  hard  for  these  people 
to  stay  in  touch  with  and  to  express  feelings.  As  a  consequence, 
they  tend  to  get  involved  with  overly  emotional  people.  I  have  a 
client  who  has  no  water  in  her  chart.  When  I  have  a  problem  and 
try  to  talk  to  her  about  it,  she  says  all  of  the  wrong  things.  She 
cannot  commiserate  with  me  and  only  approaches  problems  ob- 
jectively, yet  she  is  a  fabulous  cook.  She  may  lack  compassion  and 
empathy,  but  she  can  make  me  feel  better  with  delights  from  her 
kitchen. 
If  a  person  lacks  an  element,  he  or  she  needs  to  develop  the 
missing  traits.  Those  who  lack  fire  must  develop  self-confidence 
and  an  "up"  approach  to  life,  and  find  their  own  personal  spiritual- 
ity. People  who  lack  earth  need  to  develop  practicality  and  do  things 
to  keep  their  feet  on  the  ground.  The  remedy  for  a  lack  of  air  is  to 
cultivate  the  ability  to  really  listen  to  others  and  to  learn  objectivity 
by  consciously  putting  themselves  in  the  other  person  s  shoes.  A 
lack  of  water  in  the  chart  can  be  brought  into  balance  by  learning 
to  touch,  by  consciously  nuturing  others  rather  than  listening  and 
solving  problems  only  on  a  rational,  analytical  level,  and  by  making 
a  strong  effort  to  really  feel  other  people's  pain. 

<<<PAGE 20>>>
6    /    Psychological  Profiles 
The  Three  Modalities 
After  examining  the  elements,  I  look  at  the  modalities — cardinal, 
fixed,  and  mutable.  The  modalities  most  clearly  express  how 
people  respond  to  stimuli  and  especially  how  they  act  under  ten- 
sion. Will  the  individual  initiate  action?  Or  try  to  block,  stop,  re- 
sist, hold  back,  and  not  react?  Or  will  he  or  she  stew  over  things 
before  doing  something?  The  modalities  give  a  clear  picture  of 
how  each  person  will  handle  the  energy,  especially  when  there  is 
an  overflow  of  it. 
Cardinal  Signs 
It  is  easiest  to  make  predictions  for  cardinal  people.  If  you  see  a  car- 
dinal T-Square  or  a  stellium  in  a  cardinal  sign,  you'll  find  a  person 
for  whom  things  are  happening.  Tell  this  client  what  to  expect,  and 
he  or  she  will  agree  and  probably  say,  "Yes,  that's  already  going  on" 
or,  "I  was  thinking  of  doing  that."  Life  is  full  of  adventure  and 
change  for  such  people.  They  are  the  easiest  to  predict  for  because 
of  the  way  they  respond  to  tension.  They  welcome  change  and 
aren't  afraid  to  initiate  it.  They  also  respond  well  to  new  ideas  and 
are  action-oriented.  They  thrive  on  crisis  and  need  it  to  motivate 
them.  If  there  isn't  a  crisis  going  on,  they'll  create  one.  One  of  my 
cardinal-sign  friends  says,  "When  I  have  a  crisis  a  day,  I'm  happiest." 
Fixed  Signs 
Those  with  a  lot  of  fixity  in  their  chart  will  go  into  denial  during 
times  of  change.  They  will  say,  "Nothing  is  going  on.  Nothing  is 
happening."  Pluto,  Uranus,  Saturn  (all  major  forces)  can  be 
squaring  everything  in  their  chart,  and  they  will  still  insist  that 
nothing  is  happening. 
This  is  an  astrologer's  nightmare.  The  astrologer  tries  to  help 
clients  see  reality.  But  these  clients  believe  that  if  they  say  some- 
thing isn't  happening,  then  it  isn't.  The  astrologer  sees  the  tension 
in  their  chart  and  the  events  that  should  be  transpiring,  but  these 
clients  feel  that  if  they  deny  it  long  enough  or  strong  enough, 
then  their  life  will  not  have  to  change. 

<<<PAGE 21>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  7 
I  sometimes  notice  this  with  myself  because  I  have  fixed  signs 
on  the  cusps  of  the  fourth  and  tenth  houses.  So  I  stay  in  the  same 
career  or  the  same  job  for  years  and  resist  moving  even  though  I 
could  be  going  to  a  far  better  place.  I  always  find  reasons  not  to  be 
happy  about  it  and  drag  my  feet.  Once  I  make  the  move,  I  adjust 
and  adapt  quickly,  but  the  initial  changes  in  those  areas  of  my  life 
are  never  easy. 
People  with  fixed  energy  are  very  resistant  to  change,  so  they 
need  to  take  time  to  prepare  themselves  for  the  inevitable  change. 
There  will  always  be  some  who  dig  in  their  heels  and  refuse  to 
make  the  change  or  even  acknowledge  it  for  as  long  as  possible. 
Of  course,  this  ability  to  stay  on  track  and  focus  is  also  a  great 
strength.  A  cardinal  sign  will  respond  to  the  energy  immediately, 
often  with  the  first  swing  of  a  transit  or  the  first  trigger  of  a  pro- 
gression. However,  a  fixed  sign  may  have  many  triggers,  such  as  a 
transit,  occurring  three  times,  or  the  aspect  can  be  way  past  nor- 
mally accepted  orbs  before  he  or  she  will  acknowledge  it.  Many 
things  happen  to  these  people,  but  it  takes  a  lot  of  tension  and 
pressure  for  them  to  react  or  admit  it. 
I  have  a  client  who  is  a  Taurus  with  Scorpio  rising.  He  has  fixed 
angles  and  a  fixed  T-Square  in  his  chart.  I  have  been  reading  for  him 
for  twenty  years,  and  all  of  that  time  he  has  wanted  to  get  a  divorce. 
Ten  years  ago  I  told  him,  "If  you're  going  to  get  a  divorce,  get  it 
now  or  don't  do  it.  You're  going  to  make  a  lot  of  money  in  about 
three  or  four  years  and  then  a  divorce  is  going  to  cost  you  twice  as 
much."  He  did  not  divorce  and  now  he  says,  "You  were  so  right.  I'm 
so  sorry"  He  still  comes  in  and  talks  about  a  divorce,  but  he's  in  his 
seventies  and  I  told  him  I  think  it's  best  to  talk  of  other  things. 
A  fixed  man  who  is  very  much  in  love  may  need  to  be  given  an 
ultimatum  to  get  him  to  walk  down  the  aisle.  Not  only  does  the 
woman  have  to  take  a  firm  stand,  but  she  also  may  have  to  leave 
him.  Fixity  can't  stand  change,  so  such  a  drastic  measure  may  pro- 
duce the  desired  result.  While  this  strategy  works  for  some,  it 
doesn't  work  for  everybody  Nonetheless,  the  thought  of  a  change 
is  difficult  at  best  for  any  fixed  sign.  If  these  clients  are  forced  to 

<<<PAGE 22>>>
8    /    Psychological  Profiles 
decide  between  two  changes — should  they  go  it  alone  and  start  all 
over  (which  they  really  hate)  or  make  the  commitment,  they  will 
often  opt  for  making  the  commitment. 
Not  only  are  the  fixed  signs  slow  to  move  or  change,  but  they 
also  tend  to  be  late.  Taureans  are  just  slow,  Scorpios  use  tardiness 
as  a  subtle  power  struggle,  Leos  enjoy  making  an  entrance,  and 
Aquarians  want  things  on  their  own  terms.  Even  though  fixed 
signs  are  often  late  for  dates,  once  they  get  there,  they  stay  forever. 
A  good  ftiend  of  mine  is  an  example  of  this.  He'll  say,  "Fll  be  over 
in  the  morning."  At  two  in  the  afternoon  he  shows  up,  and  then 
he'll  stay  all  night.  If  you're  on  the  phone  with  him,  you  can't  get 
off^.  He  is  slow  to  get  going  and  slow  to  move  or  change,  because 
fixity  is  so  prominent  in  his  chart. 
It's  important  to  note  how  energy  works  when  progressions 
are  in  fixed  signs.  I  am  not  a  fixed  person,  but  I  have  some  fixity  in 
my  chart.  When  I  had  a  progression  in  fixed  signs,  I  noticed  that 
for  the  first  two  years,  when  it  was  applying  and  exact,  very  little 
was  happening.  At  first  I  said,  "It  isn't  working."  Then  when  it 
was  2°  after  the  progression,  the  events  of  that  progression  took 
place.  1  had  a  fixed  progression  that  worked  2°  late,  and  did  it  ever 
work!  With  the  progressed  Sun  in  the  ninth  house  of  legal  matters 
squaring  Saturn,  my  chart  ruler  in  the  first  house,  in  fixed  signs,  I 
became  embroiled  in  a  two-year  legal  battle  through  the  federal 
courts  to  get  the  laws  about  astrology  changed.  At  the  same  time, 
my  husband's  partner  died,  which  caused  him  a  great  deal  of  an- 
guish and  financial  pressure.  There  was  also  a  bitter  one-year  legal 
fight  with  his  partner's  widow.  It  was  a  very  difficult  time,  and  the 
progression  was  2""  past  when  all  of  this  began.  On  the  positive 
side,  this  was  also  the  time  when  I  took  stock  of  my  body,  lost 
twenty  pounds,  and  started  a  disciplined  exercise  program.  I  also 
got  into  a  new  business  with  vitamins  and  became  very  health- 
conscious.  In  my  case,  as  in  those  of  my  clients,  I  have  found  that 
events  happen  later  when  there's  a  progression  in  fixed  signs. 

<<<PAGE 23>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  9 
Mutable  Signs 
I  think  the  most  interesting  modality  is  the  mutable.  Much  of 
what  happens  to  mutable  people  is  in  the  head.  So  many  times 
things  are  going  on  mentally  rather  than  in  tangible  form.  Clients 
with  many  mutable  aspects  are  often  influenced  by  what's  going 
on  in  the  rest  of  the  chart.  They  adjust  and  adapt  to  other  influ- 
ences. Because  they  work  on  a  mental  level,  those  with  a  lot  of 
mutability  may  react  to  an  aspect  by  making  a  list.  When  the  list  is 
done,  they  think  the  project  is  done.  With  negative  tension,  much 
of  what  happens  involves  fear,  paranoia,  agitation,  and  panic  at- 
tacks. A  client  of  mine  with  a  mutable  T-Square  says  that  when 
he's  exposed  to  a  lot  of  tension,  he  becomes  almost  paralyzed  and 
afraid  to  go  forward  or  backward,  afraid  to  make  a  decision.  Mu- 
table signs  stew  and  firet  endlessly  and  really  suffer  in  the  process. 
While  they  experience  actual  events,  the  hardest  part  of  the  process 
is  the  psychological  anguish  they  experience. 
Tm  extremely  careful  when  telling  something  negative  or  diffi- 
cult to  clients  with  a  lot  of  mutability,  because  when  they  leave, 
they  only  remember  the  bad  things  I  say,  never  the  good.  I  can  say 
twenty  good  things  and  one  negative  thing,  and  guess  what  they 
take  with  them? 
Drivers 
In  addition  to  the  elements  and  modalities,  there  is  always  an  addi- 
tional component  that  really  motivates  people.  For  lack  of  a  better 
term,  I  call  this  the  client's  driver.  It  is  what  fires  up  their  engine 
and  gets  them  going.  It  is  a  strong  part  of  what  propels  these 
people  and  gives  them  their  life  focus.  Some  powerful  drivers  are 
T-Squares,  strong  applying  squares,  stelliums,  conjunctions,  and 
oppositions.  Sometimes  I  do  a  lecture  that  I  call  "The  Ten  Dead- 
liest Aspects."  As  I  was  writing  it,  I  found  that  our  hardest  aspects 
are  also  our  strongest,  most  positive  driving  forces.  When  I  counsel 
a  client,  I  usually  say,  "This  is  the  best  thing  in  your  chart  and  the 
most  difficult  thing  at  the  same  time." 

<<<PAGE 24>>>
10    /    Psychological  Profiles 
T-Squares  as  Drivers 
T-Squares  certainly  are  drivers.  I  once  did  a  research  project  and 
found  that  a  large  percentage  of  successful  people  have  T-Squares. 
Here's  how  they  work  in  the  different  modalities: 
The  cardinal  T-Square  creates  a  feeling  that  comes  up  from 
deep  inside  and  says,  "I  have  to  take  action.  I  have  to  lead.  I  have  to 
be  somebody.  I  have  to  do  something."  It  is  a  deep  motivation, 
and  I  consider  clients  with  this  aspect  to  be  the  born  entrepre- 
neurs of  the  zodiac.  They  are  the  trendsetters,  the  action  takers, 
and  this  is  what  drives  them.  If  I  see  a  cardinal  T-Square  in  some- 
one's chart,  I  always  talk  to  them  about  having  their  own  business. 
Often  they  already  do,  are  thinking  about  it,  did  it,  or  want  to. 
There's  always  something  entrepreneurial  in  their  spirit.  Many  of 
them  say  to  me,  "Oh,  I  started  my  own  business  when  I  was  ten 
years  old  with  my  first  lemonade  stand,  and  I  never  quit."  That's 
how  people  with  cardinal  T-Squares  work.  If  they  don't  have  their 
own  business,  they  will  take  on  a  leadership  role  somewhere  else 
in  their  life.  Many  times  they  will  stay  in  a  corporate  structure 
only  if  they  are  authority  figures  and  are  moving  up  the  ladder. 
Because  they  are  natural  self-starters,  cardinal  people  do  well  in 
sales.  Again,  even  though  they  work  for  someone  else,  they  feel 
like  they  are  in  a  leadership  role,  because  they  call  the  shots  and 
have  the  freedom  to  make  most  major  decisions. 
People  with  fixed  T-Squares  are  the  focusers  of  the  zodiac. 
They  are  people  who  finish  what  they  start.  For  instance,  if  they 
start  college,  they  often  won  t  quit  until  they  have  an  advanced  de- 
gree. They  focus  on  accomplishing  their  goals,  and  if  the  goals  are 
good  ones,  they  will  be  successful.  Whenever  I  counsel  a  person 
with  a  fixed  T-Square,  I  always  say,  "You  can  do  or  be  anything  if 
you  focus  on  it.  Set  a  goal,  because  you  will  have  the  grit  and  the 
fortitude  to  accomplish  it.  And  you  will  work  your  way  through 
difficulties  because  you  learned  early  in  life  that  there  are  obstacles, 
stumbling  blocks,  and  challenges.  But  you  also  learned  how  to 
keep  going."  I  saw  this  with  my  stepson,  who  has  a  massive  fixed 

<<<PAGE 25>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  11 
T-Square.  Pluto  was  setting  it  off  and  I  was  quite  concerned.  I 
thought,  "What's  going  to  happen  to  him?"  He  already  had  his  un- 
dergraduate degree  and  was  working  in  the  banking  field,  but  he 
decided  to  go  back  to  school.  He  got  an  MBA  and  then  went  on  to 
law  school.  He  worked  extremely  hard  and  ended  up  in  the  top  2 
percent  of  his  class. 
People  with  mutable  T-Squares  also  have  the  energy  to  achieve, 
but  many  times  it  is  through  conscientiousness.  These  are  the 
people  who  dot  their  i's  and  cross  their  t's.  They're  highly  creative 
and  flexible.  I  have  noted  that  many  times  they  are  adult  children 
of  alcoholics,  or  there  is  some  issue  around  drugs,  addiction,  or 
weight  management  in  their  environment  (often  connected  to  a 
parent  or  sibling).  The  mutable-T-Square  child  many  times  is  the 
hero-child  of  a  dysfunctional  family.  Often  these  children  come 
from  single -parent  homes  where  they  had  to  take  on  a  lot  of  re- 
sponsibility as  a  young  child. 
Parents  with  a  mutable  child  should  express  extra  concern  for 
their  child's  friends  and  be  aware  of  any  negative  influences.  Mu- 
table children  often  become  what  they  are  exposed  to.  They  are 
chameleons  who  absorb  energy  and  reflect  it  back.  On  the  plus 
side,  mutable  T-Squares  can  often  create  a  drive  for  perfection, 
enormous  creativity,  and  great  versatility.  It  is  important  to  re- 
member that  all  T-Squares  are  distinct  drivers  either  for  the  good 
or  for  the  bad. 
Squares  as  Drivers 
The  Sun  square  Saturn,  the  Moon  square  Saturn,  Mars  square  Sat- 
urn, and  Venus  square  Saturn  are  a  few  aspects  among  many  oth- 
ers that  drive  a  person  or  are  a  focus  of  the  chart.  They  are  also  dri- 
vers that  motivate  a  person  to  achieve,  to  accomplish,  and  to  go 
wherever  he  or  she  wants  to  go.  People  with  many  Saturn  squares 
are  often  highly  disciplined.  They  have  learned  that  if  they  don't  do 
it  all  right,  they'll  get  into  deep  trouble,  so  they  usually  try  to  do 
things  the  right  way.  They  are  achievers,  accomplishers,  and  are 

<<<PAGE 26>>>
12    /    Psychological  Profiles 
very  structured.  They  do  what  they  say  they  are  going  to  do  and  are 
dependable,  ambitious,  and  driven.  They  set  high  standards  for 
themselves  and  for  others.  The  problem  is  that  they  cannot  or 
should  not  expect  people  to  work  or  function  at  the  same  level  of 
perfection  at  which  they  function.  They  can  be  their  own  worst 
enemy  and  harshest  critic  by  being  unrealistic  about  what  they  and 
others  can  accomplish. 
We Ve  seen  a  lot  of  this  with  the  superwoman  generation. 
Many  women  drive  themselves  with  overly  high  expectations, 
which  can  lead  to  sadness  and  depression.  They  must  learn  to  ap- 
preciate their  achievements,  and  they  need  to  stop  and  pat  them- 
selves on  the  back  and  luxuriate  in  a  job  well  done.  Also,  they 
must  not  be  so  controlling.  The  need  to  control  comes  from  a 
place  where  they  feel  that  everything  must  be  done  perfectly.  Even 
when  I  predict  for  them,  their  first  response  is,  "No,  that's  not 
right."  They  want  to  be  in  control.  Being  a  superwoman  can  be  dif- 
ficult in  relationships.  I  have  a  client  who  is  an  incredibly  accom- 
plished and  successful  businesswoman,  but  cannot  find  a  man  to 
measure  up  (this  also  applies  to  her  employees  and  friends).  She  has 
her  Sun,  Mars,  and  Saturn  conjunct  in  Aquarius.  She  is  very 
pretty — five  foot  seven  and  a  size  four.  She  earns  a  lot  of  money,  but 
cannot  find  a  man  nor  keep  an  employee,  and  has  very  few  friends 
who  measure  up  to  her  rigid  standards.  Her  quest  for  perfection  in- 
terferes with  her  happiness.  She,  like  many  other  superwomen,  for- 
got that  once  you  become  a  goddess,  it's  very  hard  to  find  a  god. 
Not  every  person  is  willing  to  work  and  perform  at  as  high  a  level  as 
these  women  do. 
A  person  with  the  Sun  square  Saturn  and  Mars  square  Saturn 
has  a  driving  force  that  comes  up  from  deep  inside  and  says,  'Tve 
got  to  go  out  there  and  do  it.  IVe  got  to  be  more  and  have  more.  I 
must  accomplish.  I  have  to  achieve."  If  this  aspect  manifests  itself 
in  the  second  house,  the  emphasis  will  be  financial.  Such  clients 
never  have  enough  money  to  really  feel  secure.  If  the  aspect 
shows  itself  in  the  tenth  house,  they  never  have  enough  status  to 

<<<PAGE 27>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  13 
feel  worthy.  If  it's  in  the  seventh  house,  their  partners  never  quite 
measure  up.  Because  the  Sun  is  involved,  often  they  want  to  prove 
something  to  themselves  or  to  their  fathers. 
A  client  of  mine,  whose  Sun  and  Venus  square  his  Saturn,  got 
the  message  from  his  father  that  whatever  he  did  was  never  good 
enough.  This  man  worked  his  way  through  college  and  graduated 
from  engineering  school.  It  took  him  five  years  to  do  it,  because 
he  had  to  work  full-time  and  go  to  school  full-time.  He  and  his 
wife  had  three  children  before  he  graduated.  After  his  graduation, 
his  father  said,  "Engineers  are  a  dime  a  dozen.  You  should  have 
been  a  teacher."  Whatever  this  client  did  was  never  good  enough 
to  satisfy  his  father.  Unfortunately,  this  man  modeled  himself  after 
his  father,  so  he  does  and  says  the  same  things  to  his  children. 
A  person  with  the  Moon  square  Saturn  often  has  issues  with  his 
or  her  mother  or  nurturing  parent.  Clients  with  this  aspect  may  not 
have  had  the  unconditional  love  they  needed  from  their  mother,  so 
they  feel  they  must  earn  love.  They  must  measure  up,  and  love  will 
come  to  them  only  when  they  live  up  to  mother's  standards  and  ex- 
pectations. As  children,  these  people  heard  phrases  like  "I'll  love 
you  if  you  get  all  As  on  your  report  card"  or  "I  will  be  very  un- 
happy with  if  you  don't  keep  your  room  clean."  They  are  often 
compared  in  a  negative  way  to  other  people's  children.  Enough  is 
never  good  enough.  Because  of  this  basic  insecurity,  they  think  they 
must  work  hard  to  prove  themselves. 
Both  the  Sun  square  Saturn  and  the  Moon  square  Saturn  also 
create  control  issues.  The  person  with  the  Sun  square  Saturn  had 
control  issues  with  his  or  her  father,  and  someone  with  the  Moon 
square  Saturn  many  times  had  control  issues  with  his  or  her 
mother.  Often  the  client's  parents  were  cold,  judgmental,  and 
controlling.  Clients  with  these  aspects  often  incorporate  this  en- 
ergy into  themselves.  They  tend  to  model  or  to  parrot  their  par- 
ents' behavior.  The  challenge  for  these  people  (as  it  is  for  anyone 
with  hard  aspects)  is  to  work  the  energy  constructively,  and  not  to 
repeat  the  negative  expression  of  it,  but  instead  to  use  it  at  a 

<<<PAGE 28>>>
14    /    Psychological  Profiles 
higher  level.  A  person  who's  evolving  will  recognize  it  and  work 
hard  to  avoid  it.  It  can  be  helpful  to  say  to  clients,  "You're  going  to 
slip  into  this  behavior  unconsciously.  The  key  to  growth  is  to  know 
when  you're  doing  it  and  then  stop  yourself." 
When  Venus  squares  Saturn  in  a  client's  chart,  issues  around 
love,  money,  and  self- worth  usually  arise.  The  individual  often  felt 
rejected  as  a  child,  so  he  or  she  feels  inadequate,  unacceptable, 
unlovable,  and  not  perfect  enough.  Many  times  the  source  of 
these  feelings  was  a  real  lack  of  love  ft-om  one  or  both  parents.  As 
a  result,  these  clients  are  always  looking  for  proof  of  their  worth 
and  have  a  hard  time  accepting  love.  Sometimes  they  have  a  diffi- 
cult time  charging  enough  for  what  they  do  or  they  cannot  attract 
enough  love  or  money  to  satisfy  themselves.  At  this  point,  the  as- 
trologer should  go  back  to  the  basics.  Venus  is  the  love  nature  and 
Saturn  can  be  cold,  so  the  love  nature  can  be  cool  and  there  is  dif- 
ficulty in  expressing  love  or  affection.  Walls  go  up  and  the  cool- 
ness these  people  project  can  make  it  hard  for  others  to  approach 
them.  Once  they  feel  others  can  be  trusted  or  have  passed  the  test, 
then  they  often  relax  and  allow  people  to  come  closer. 
The  Venus-square-Saturn  person  is  almost  always  bitterly  dis- 
appointed in  love.  Even  someone  with  soft  aspects  of  Venus /Sat- 
urn can  experience  delay  or  restriction  in  love.  I  have  Venus  trine 
Saturn  and  I  married  my  true  love  at  age  fifty.  Any  Venus/ Saturn 
aspect  will  bring  into  the  life  at  least  one  deep  disillusionment  in 
love.  I  usually  tell  clients,  "There  will  be  disappointment  in  your 
love  life,  and  it  can  manifest  with  love  coming  late  in  your  lifetime. 
Saturn  does  not  deny  love,  it  delays  it.  If  you  work  through  your 
Venus /Saturn  issues,  you  will  find  love."  Unfortunately,  I  have 
heard  other  astrologers  say  to  clients,  "You  will  never  find  love  in 
this  lifetime."  That  is  not  true.  Love  could  be  delayed  or  there 
may  be  disappointments  to  work  through.  The  client  must  learn 
to  modify  his  or  her  behavior.  Once  that  is  done,  the  walls  will 
come  down  and  love  can  happen.  Free  will  enters  the  picture  here. 
These  clients  are  not  bound  by  destiny,  they  are  challenged  by  it. 

<<<PAGE 29>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  15 
In  counseling,  my  underlying  theme  is  always  this:  You  can  be 
challenged  by  destiny,  but  you  are  not  controlled  by  it. 
Clients  with  a  Mars /Saturn  aspect  are  usually  very  focused,  dis- 
ciplined, and  prepared.  They  work  hard  to  achieve  their  goals  and 
overcome  obstacles.  Those  with  a  fixed  square  have  a  particularly 
strong  focus.  Early  on  they  learned  that  whatever  they  did  had  to 
be  done  right.  But  there  is  also  a  stop-go  energy  at  work  here. 
They  will  work  hard  for  two  or  three  days  on  a  project,  and  then 
the  fourth  day  they  will  have  to  stay  in  bed  because  they  are  so 
worn  out.  Many  times  there  is  an  inconsistency  present  with  their 
energy.  They  are  very  competitive  and  work  well  under  pressure, 
so  they  do  their  best  work  in  competition.  In  most  cases  they  will 
triumph. 
Clients  with  a  link  between  Pluto  and  a  personal  planet  are  at- 
tracted to  power  (as  is  the  case  with  any  Pluto  aspect).  They  can 
be  ruthless,  obsessed,  or  have  a  single-focus  ambition  that  rules 
their  lives.  They  have  a  great  fear  of  being  controlled  and  so  have 
to  guard  against  being  controlling. 
If  a  client  does  not  have  the  particular  aspects  mentioned  here, 
his  or  her  driver  may  be  another  square.  Often  it  is  the  tightest 
square  that  becomes  the  driver.  The  Moon  square  Sun  is  one  dri- 
ver that  creates  conflict  between  the  ego  and  the  emotions.  Over 
the  years  I  have  noticed  that  Sun-square-Moon  children  feel  the 
need  to  bond  with  only  one  parent  at  a  time.  Sometimes  they 
don  t  know  which  parent  to  please.  Famed  astrologer  Isabel 
Hickey  once  told  me  that  the  Sun-square-Moon  person  was  many 
times  the  child  who  was  born  of  an  inharmonious  conception,  so 
the  person  is  out  of  sync.  I  have  not  seen  that  to  be  true  all  the 
time.  I  know  a  very  happy  couple  who  have  two  children  with  the 
Sun  square  Moon  in  their  natal  charts.  In  this  case,  however,  the 
parents  have  reversed  roles.  The  mother  is  the  authority  figure 
and  big  breadwinner  and  the  father  is  the  nurturer. 
While  Saturn  squares  are  about  ambition  and  self-worth, 
Venus /Mars  squares  often  work  more  in  personal  relationships. 

<<<PAGE 30>>>
16    /    Psychological  Profiles 
Unfortunately,  what  fulfills  these  people  emotionally  does  not 
necessarily  fulfill  them  sexually,  or  vice  versa.  They  always  yearn 
for  more  and  think  the  grass  is  greener  somewhere  else.  They  can 
be  quite  promiscuous  if  other  such  indications  are  present  in  the 
chart.  I  have  a  client  who  has  Venus  square  Mars,  and  while  her  hus- 
band tremendously  fulfills  her  emotionally,  there  is  not  a  good 
physical  side  to  their  marriage.  They  live  like  brother  and  sister,  and 
he  is  her  best  friend.  I  have  other  clients  who  have  a  great  sex  life 
with  their  partner,  but  with  no  emotional  fulfillment.  They  feel 
they  just  can  t  have  it  all. 
Conjunctions  and  Stelliums  as  Drivers 
The  reason  conjunctions,  particularly  stelliums  (three  or  more  plan- 
ets in  one  sign  or  house),  are  so  powerful  is  because  more  than  one 
planet  in  conjunction  (even  a  wide  one)  will  emphasize  and  exag- 
gerate the  qualities  of  that  sign.  Many  clients  have  their  Sun  in  one 
sign  and  a  stellium  in  another,  and  because  of  this  they  present 
themselves  much  more  as  the  sign  of  the  stellium. 
Conjunctions  and  stelliums  have  an  enormous  impact  on 
defining  the  person.  A  person  with  a  stellium  of  planets  in  the 
first  house  or  in  Aries  will  express  energy  differently  than  a  person 
with  a  stellium  in  Taurus  or  in  the  second  house.  Stelliums  or  con- 
junctions indicate  focused,  directed  energy  that  manifests  through 
the  sign  and  house  in  which  they  fall. 
Strong  cardinal  aspects  (Aries,  Cancer,  Libra,  and  Capricorn) 
or  first,  fourth,  seventh,  and  tenth-house  stelliums  will  respond 
quickly  to  the  energy  with  initiative,  excitement,  and  a  desire  for 
action.  As  an  astrologer,  you  must  integrate  not  only  the  sign  the 
stellium  is  in,  but  also  the  house.  The  following  are  some  exam- 
ples of  how  you  must  blend  the  influences.  Note  that  in  this  sec- 
tion I  am  not  implying  that  every  Sagittarius  has  a  wide  breadth  of 
knowledge  or  that  every  Gemini  is  sharp,  witty,  outgoing,  and  so- 
cial. I  am  simply  describing  the  most  obvious  characteristics  of 
each  concentration  of  energy. 

<<<PAGE 31>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  17 
A  stellium  in  Aries  or  in  the  first  house  will  express  itself  by 
being  a  pioneer,  a  trendsetter  with  incredible  energy.  These 
people  will  come  into  a  room  and  say,  "Let's  do  this.  Let's  do  that. 
Let's  get  going."  Their  energy  is  contagious  and  stimulates  others 
to  do  and  act.  They  are  most  comfortable  working  on  their  own 
and  being  independent.  They  often  make  great  salespeople,  as 
they  are  very  self-actualizing  and  just  don't  take  no  for  an  answer. 
A  stellium  in  Cancer  or  the  fourth  house  normally  exagger- 
ates the  emotional  nurturing  qualities  and  is  overly  sensitive. 
Clients  with  either  of  these  aspects  have  great  perception  and  un- 
derstanding of  other  people  and  the  ability  to  lead  by  having  intu- 
itive insight  of  others.  The  Cancer  boss  comes  into  the  room  and 
says,  "How  do  you  feel  today?  How's  your  family?  Did  you  get 
over  that  cold  you  had  yesterday?  I  thought  it  would  be  a  good 
idea  if  we  did  this  and  that.  This  might  be  a  good  project  for 
today."  When  the  boss  leaves,  the  worker  feels  that  he  or  she 
thought  up  the  project,  but  actually  the  Cancer  boss  led  him  or 
her  to  it. 
A  stellium  in  Libra  or  the  seventh  house  usually  bestows 
tremendous  tact  and  diplomacy.  The  truth  is  that  most  Libras  lead 
by  manipulation,  but  astrologers  don't  say  that.  Libras  actually 
lead  by  seeing  both  sides  of  a  question,  considering  all  the  angles, 
and  looking  at  the  ups  and  downs  of  every  situation.  Libras  have 
the  ability  to  get  along  with  people,  and  most  people  think  that 
they  are  a  Libra's  best  friend.  Often  I  will  be  at  a  party  and  the 
conversation  will  drift  to  politics.  A  Libra  will  say,  "Oh  yeah,  yeah. 
You  are  right.  The  Democrats  this  and  the  Democrats  that. 
They're  humanitarian.  They  give  to  causes."  Ten  minutes  later  I 
v/ill  hear  that  person  talking  to  someone  else  and  saying,  "Those 
Republicans  have  their  heads  on  straight.  They  are  good  for  this 
and  that."  They  will  take  the  absolute  opposite  position  and  agree 
with  both  sides.  They  are  not  two-faced,  they  just  see  both  sides  of 
any  issue. 

<<<PAGE 32>>>
18    /    Psychological  Profiles 
A  stellium  in  Capricorn  or  the  tenth  house  inclines  a  person 
to  be  the  boss,  the  one  naturally  in  charge.  A  Capricorn  leads  just 
by  being  called  a  leader.  Give  a  Capricorn  a  title  or  a  presidency  of 
anything,  and  he  or  she  will  be  happy.  Capricorns  lead  by  climbing 
the  ladder,  getting  to  the  top.  They  need  status,  position,  and  re- 
spect. They  eventually  become  the  president  of  most  organiza- 
tions to  which  they  belong. 
Strong  fixed  (Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio,  and  Aquarius)  or  second, 
fifth,  eighth,  and  eleventh-house  stelliums  will  be  resistant  to 
change,  more  cautious  and  hesitant,  and  will  respond  to  energy 
more  slowly  and  with  trepidation. 
A  stellium  in  Taurus  or  the  second  house  usually  gives  a  client 
a  strong  material  drive.  More  than  any  other  sign,  these  people 
need  to  accumulate  beautiful  things  and  associate  with  beautiful 
people.  They  are  committed  to  beauty,  expensive  possessions,  and 
sensuous  things  such  as  good  food,  massages,  and  nice  clothes. 
When  a  Taurus  client  of  mine  got  his  first  luxury  car,  a  Cadillac,  he 
got  behind  the  wheel  and  told  me  later,  "It  was  almost  as  good  as 
having  sex,"  which  is  also  a  priority  for  Taurus. 
A  stellium  in  Leo  or  the  fifth  house  gives  the  client  a  theatri- 
cal, dramatic  flair  with  a  strong  inclination  towards  enjoyment. 
Leos  love  to  be  on  stage.  They  like  attention,  need  to  shine,  and 
want  to  be  the  dramatic  figure.  If  it  means  dancing  on  a  tabletop 
or  buying  everybody  drinks,  they  will  do  it.  I  have  a  Leo  client 
who  says  he  gets  upset  when  he  goes  to  a  funeral  because  the 
corpse  gets  all  the  attention.  When  I  go  out  to  lunch  with  a  Leo,  I 
let  them  pick  up  the  check  because  it  makes  them  feel  good.  They 
are  generous,  warm,  and  romantic. 
A  stellium  in  Scorpio  or  the  eighth  house  gives  the  client  in- 
tensity and  magnetism.  Strong  Scorpio  influences  create  some  of 
the  most  focused  people  you  will  ever  meet.  They  have  tunnel  vi- 
sion about  their  goals.  I  always  say,  "If  a  Scorpio  is  going  some- 
where or  doing  something,  get  out  of  the  way  They  will  do  it. 
They  will  get  there."  They  have  incredible  drive.  I  have  tactfully 

<<<PAGE 33>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  19 
told  Scorpios,  "You  can  be  kind  of  ruthless."  They  have  answered, 
"Kind  of  ?  I  am  ruthless." 
A  stellium  in  Aquarius  or  the  eleventh  house  is  often  ex- 
pressed as  having  a  tremendous  need  for  freedom  and  indepen- 
dence. Typically,  Aquarians  are  unique,  individualistic,  cause-ori- 
ented, and  friendly,  but  they  tend  to  be  loners.  Many  times  clients 
with  stelliums  in  this  sign  are  geniuses  in  a  given  field  or  may  just 
have  what  other  people  consider  to  be  weird  ideas.  They  can  be 
ahead  of  or  behind  the  times.  Many  Aquarians  collect  antiques. 
Whatever  they  do,  they  do  not  want  to  be  like  anyone  else.  Two 
of  the  most  insulting  things  you  can  say  to  an  Aquarian  are  "You 
remind  me  of  so  and  so"  or  "You  look  just  like  a  friend  of  mine." 
The  mutable  signs  (Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagittarius,  and  Pisces)  or 
third,  sixth,  ninth,  and  twelfth  house  stelliums  will  react  to  energy 
on  a  mental  level.  Under  tension,  they  may  become  paralyzed  or 
caught  up  in  mental  stewing. 
A  stellium  in  Gemini  or  the  third  house  can  give  a  client  great 
mental  agility  and  vast  intellectual  curiosity.  I  have  seen  many 
clients  with  this  placement  who  have  a  great  facility  for  foreign  lan- 
guages. These  people  are  alert,  quick,  witty,  and  have  many  differ- 
ent ideas.  They  are  fun  to  be  around  and  are  so  clever  with  words 
that  laughter  seems  to  follow  them.  The  downside  is  that  their  per- 
sonalities can  change  on  a  dime. 
A  stellium  in  Virgo  or  the  sixth  house  can  make  the  person  a 
workaholic,  someone  who  must  do  and  serve.  These  people  feel 
fulfilled  only  when  they  are  productive.  They  are  fastidious,  good 
with  details,  analytical,  and  precise.  Virgos  can  be  feisty,  witty,  and 
clever  wordsmiths.  They  can  also  be  very  earthy  and  lusty,  espe- 
cially if  something  in  the  stellium  falls  at  7°  Virgo,  the  promiscu- 
ous degree. 
A  stellium  in  Sagittarius  or  the  ninth  house  can  make  a  per- 
son idealistic  and  a  seeker  of  knowledge  and  the  truth.  These 
people  are  lucky,  optimistic,  confident,  buoyant,  joyful,  expansive, 
and  have  lots  of  energy.  Gemini,  the  opposite  sign,  is  an  informa- 
tion gatherer  and  likes  little  bits  and  pieces  of  information  and 

<<<PAGE 34>>>
20    /    Psychological  Profiles 
gossip  about  many  things.  Sagittarians  want  the  entire  picture. 
They  want  an  advanced  degree  in  everything  they  study,  along 
with  great  depth  and  wisdom. 
A  stellium  in  Pisces  or  the  twelfth  house  makes  a  client  cre- 
ative, sensitive,  and  intuitive.  These  people  can,  however,  also  be- 
come martyrs  and  sacrificial  victims.  They  often  feel  sorry  for 
themselves  and  can  pull  others  around  them  down.  They  have  to 
guard  against  being  taken  advantage  of  and  giving  and  doing  too 
much  for  others  when  it  is  no  longer  warranted.  Pisceans  are 
tuned  in  and  psychic. 
In  addition  to  noting  the  placement  of  the  stellium,  it  is  ex- 
tremely important  to  note  which  planets  are  in  the  stellium  and 
what  their  effect  may  be.  If  Saturn  is  one  of  the  planets  in  the  stel- 
lium, it  will  seem  to  hold  jurisdiction  over  the  others  and  to  tem- 
per or  restrain  the  expression  of  the  stellium.  I  was  very  surprised 
to  have  a  client  with  a  stellium  in  Aquarius  who  had  no  friends. 
When  I  looked  at  her  chart,  I  saw  that  Saturn  was  part  of  that  stel- 
lium. Usually,  Aquarians  love  people  and  people  love  Aquarians, 
but  if  Saturn  is  involved  it  tones  down  the  effect  of  the  sign.  It 
modifies,  cools,  restricts,  and  restrains  the  expression  of  the  sign. 
An  exception  to  this  rule  is  the  sign  of  Capricorn,  where  a  stellium 
that  includes  Saturn  only  makes  the  person  more  of  a  Capricorn. 
An  Aquarian  stellium  with  Saturn  will  limit  the  free  spirit  that  is 
characteristic  of  Aquarius,  so  the  client  may  be  less  unconven- 
tional. Aquarians  usually  dress  with  a  lot  of  flair,  but  if  Saturn  is 
present  they  often  dress  like  a  yuppie  and  wear  Ralph  Lauren  or 
Brooks  Brothers.  A  Sun /Venus /Saturn  stellium  in  Leo  will  not  be 
overly  generous.  Sun/ Venus/ Saturn  in  Taurus  could  make  a  client 
extremely  practical  and  thrifty  and  not  very  affectionate.  Most 
people  experience  Geminis  as  outgoing  and  talkative,  but  with  Sat- 
urn involved  they  can  be  uncharacteristically  reserved. 
Other  planets  can  also  modify  a  stellium.  For  instance,  Uranus 
can  alter  a  Capricorn  stellium  by  making  it  a  bit  unconventional 
or  at  least  less  traditional.  Neptune  usually  diffuses  Virgo,  making 

<<<PAGE 35>>>
Psychological  Profiles   /  21 
it  less  precise.  Pluto  intensifies  the  energy  of  any  stellium  it  is  in, 
making  it  more  powerful. 
Stelliums  contribute  more  energy  than  conjunctions  because 
they  are  simply  expanded  conjunctions.  As  such,  they  can  be 
strong  drivers.  A  client  with  four  planets  in  Virgo  will  be  driven  to- 
ward order,  and  concentrate  on  work  and  productivity.  A  stellium 
anywhere  is  a  strong  driving  force.  An  example  is  Mozart,  who 
had  four  planets  in  Aquarius,  three  of  them  in  his  fifth  house.  He 
was  inspired  to  express  himself  musically  in  a  unique  way.  I  have  a 
client  who  was  a  famous  baseball  pitcher  with  five  planets  in 
Aquarius  in  the  fifth  house,  the  house  of  sports  and  entertain- 
ment. Baseball  Hall  of  Famer  Robin  Yount,  who  has  four  or  five 
planets  in  Virgo,  was  always  described  as  someone  who  worked 
very  hard  to  achieve  his  goals — he  was  a  perfectionist. 
People  with  four  planets  in  Taurus  in  the  second  house  are  al- 
most obsessive-compulsive  about  money.  A  person  with  four  plan- 
ets in  the  eighth  house  could  have  a  preoccupation  with  the  psy- 
chological meaning  of  life.  This  stellium  is  often  seen  in  astrologers' 
and  psychologists'  charts. 
More  on  Conjunctions 
The  Sun  conjunct  Saturn,  the  Moon  conjunct  Saturn,  and  Mars 
conjunct  Saturn  are  all  strong  drivers  that  push  a  person  to 
achieve.  Conjunctions  work  very  personally.  Squares  often  indi- 
cate outer  forces  or  influences,  whereas  conjunctions  show  inner 
ones.  Squares  can  often  just  be  dealt  with  from  the  outside  and 
concern  things  we  draw  to  ourselves  from  the  outer  world.  Con- 
junctions force  us  to  look  at  ourselves.  For  example,  my  Sun  con- 
juncts  Neptune  exactly.  As  a  result,  I  have  to  look  at  my  suscepti- 
bility towards  self-delusion.  For  many  years  I  was  not  very  clear 
on  who  I  was.  I  was  vague  about  my  self-worth.  Now,  I  have  re- 
solved this  because  the  aspects  to  my  Sun  are  good  and  have 
helped  me  throughout  my  life.  As  I  became  more  constructive 
and  productive  and  used  my  Virgo  energy  to  become  more  suc- 
cessful, my  self-image  improved. 

<<<PAGE 36>>>
22    /    Psychological  Profiles 
/  Sun/Neptune  conjunctions  are  also  powerful  and  magnetic,  as 
\/ ire  Sun /Uranus  and  Sun /Pluto  conjunctions.  People  with  strong 
Neptune  energy,  just  as  with  strong  Pisces  energy,  often  want  to 
save  others.  A  woman  with  this  energy  may  want  to  help  an  alco- 
holic lover  or  ft-iend  give  up  drinking.  I  had  a  client  with  her  Sun 
square  Neptune  who  drew  in  every  loser  in  the  world.  She  would 
always  say,  "I  can  go  to  a  party  with  twenty-nine  wonderful  men 
and  one  loser,  and  guess  what?  I  pick  the  loser."  I  call  it  "Loser 
Radar." 
Aspects  involving  the  Sun  and  Neptune  also  give  a  person 
charisma,  psychic  intuition,  and  the  ability  to  weave  people  into 
their  spell.  These  aspects  create  an  elusive,  hard-to-define  energy. 
I  always  say  to  my  students,  "Whenever  you  are  dealing  with  Nep- 
tune, don't  be  too  definitive.  Because  of  the  nature  of  the  planet, 
you  don't  know  all  the  ways  in  which  it  works." 
Those  who  have  the  Sun  conjunct  Saturn  are  self- disciplined 
and  self-motivated.  At  an  early  age,  they  learn  that  if  they  make  a 
mistake  they  will  pay  for  it.  With  the  Sun  square  Saturn,  the  effect 
usually  involves  the  client's  father.  It  can  indicate  a  father  who 
never  acted  like  one,  a  father  who  traveled  all  the  time,  a  father 
who  just  was  not  there,  or  one  who  had  no  place  in  the  home.  It 
could  indicate  a  father  who  told  the  child  that  whatever  the  child 
did  was  never  enough  or  never  good  enough.  No  matter  how  it  is 
experienced,  as  the  conjunction,  square,  or  opposition,  the  end  re- 
sult with  the  Sun /Saturn  connection  is  the  same.  People  with 
these  aspects  push  themselves  to  perform,  to  achieve,  and  to  do 
things  the  right  way. 
The  Moon  conjunct  Saturn  can  indicate  that  a  client's  mother 
was  controlling  and  had  very  high  expectations  for  the  child.  A 
client  of  mine  has  this  aspect.  She  was  brought  up  in  a  harsh  reli- 
gious atmosphere  and  still  deals  with  those  issues  many  years 
later.  She  had  a  profound  fear  of  death  and  had  anxiety  attacks 
when  she  encountered  those  feelings.  These  were  all  instilled  by 
strict  religious  teachings.  In  addition  to  a  fear  of  death,  Saturn  can 
create  personal  fear,  guilt,  and  anxiety. 

<<<PAGE 37>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  23 
In  every  conjunction  it  is  important  to  go  back  to  the  basics 
and  think  through  the  implications  of  the  planetary  combina- 
tions. The  planets  in  a  conjunction  work  as  a  blended  unit. 
Oppositions  as  Drivers 
Oppositions  most  often  pit  an  individual  against  another  person. 
With  the  Sun  opposite  Saturn,  many  times  it  involves  the  father. 
Either  he  is  absent  in  some  way  or  is  harsh  and  not  emotionally 
expressive.  The  father  often  fails  as  a  role  model  for  the  child,  and 
other  authority  figures  often  teach  the  child  that  if  he  or  she  does 
not  do  things  right,  then  the  child  is  inadequate  or  unworthy.  An 
example  of  this  is  a  child  whose  father  was  absent.  The  role  of  the 
authority  figure  was  filled  by  the  collective  teachers  at  her  very 
strict  church  school.  It  was  a  severe  education  experience  in  which 
the  child  learned  to  be  ultraprepared  in  order  to  avoid  humiliation 
in  the  classroom. 
Oppositions  tend  to  manifest  in  relationships  because  they  in- 
dicate friction  between  a  person  and  someone  else.  There  is  al- 
ways that  polarity.  I  find  that  with  the  Sun  opposite  Pluto,  many 
times  these  people  become  successful  because  they  are  competi- 
tive with  other  people  and  they  need  to  prove  something.  The 
Sun /Pluto  square  forces  people  to  struggle  and  push,  while  the 
Sun /Pluto  conjunction  simply  puts  an  enormous,  intense,  driving 
force  into  their  lives. 
Squares  generate  a  great  deal  of  activity.  Usually  it  is  an  outside 
influence  that  forces  a  person  to  respond  to  the  energy  The  push 
actually  comes  from  within,  but  it  is  triggered  by  someone  or 
something  from  the  outside.  As  an  example,  let's  say  that  one  of 
your  client's  tenants  moves  out  without  paying  the  rent.  In  a 
square  aspect,  your  client  will  probably  have  to  renovate  the  place 
because  the  tenant  has  also  damaged  it.  With  an  opposition,  there 
could  have  been  some  negotiating. 
Clients  whose  charts  are  without  squares  usually  lead  con- 
tented lives  up  to  a  point,  but  when  a  square  is  formed  by  a  transit 

<<<PAGE 38>>>
24    /    Psychological  Profiles 
or  progression,  they  have  a  more  difficult  time  of  it  because  they 
haven  t  had  the  experience  of  dealing  with  that  type  of  influence. 
Obstacles  and  blockages  are  new  to  them.  Their  squares  are  much 
more  intense,  much  heavier,  and  the  results  more  potent.  People 
without  squares  often  feel  that  the  world  owes  them  something 
and  are  not  as  inclined  to  go  after  what  they  want  in  the  proper 
way.  They  look  for  someone  to  take  care  of  them,  someone  to  do 
it  for  them,  or  someone  on  whose  coattails  they  can  ride. 
Clients  whose  charts  are  without  oppositions,  however,  have  a 
difficult  time  learning  from  their  mistakes.  This  is  also  the  case 
with  a  void-of-course  Moon  (a  Moon  that  makes  no  aspects  before 
it  leaves  its  sign.)  Without  oppositions,  the  individual  also  is  likely 
to  have  relationship  problems  (certainly  while  they're  young). 
They  make  the  same  mistakes  over  and  over.  Because  an  opposi- 
tion mirrors  everything  back,  the  client  can  learn  from  his  or  her 
mistakes.  On  the  negative  side,  the  client  may  also  project  his  or 
her  own  shortcomings  onto  others.  If  a  client  lacks  oppositions, 
he  or  she  must  learn  to  walk  in  someone  else's  moccasins.  A  tran- 
siting planet  opposite  the  Sun  or  a  progression  forming  an  opposi- 
tion will  integrate  these  lessons  and  principles  within  this  client, 
and  he  or  she  can  resolve  this  issue  at  this  time. 
To  predict  for  a  client,  you  must  first  look  for  the  chart  driver. 
Find  out  what  makes  this  person  tick.  What  is  their  motivating 
force?  It  could  be  a  tight  square  or  a  T-Square,  or  perhaps  a  con- 
junction or  a  stellium.  It  will  be  something  differen^^  every  chart. 
It  is  extremely  important  and  you  should  rememl5b^  it  because 
when  that  driver  is  triggered,  your  client's  life  is  going  to  change 
and  things  are  going  to  happen.  You  have  to  be  prepared  for  it  in 
order  to  make  an  accurate  prediction.  Over  the/ years,  I  have 
learned  that  all  psychological  patterns  can  influence  a  chart,  but 
the  drivers  are  the  most  important. 
Yods  as  Drivers 
A  student  once  asked  me  if  a  yod  wasn't  a  driver.  I  told  him  that  I 
do  not  feel  it  is  so  much  a  driver  as  it  is  the  universe  pointing  its 

<<<PAGE 39>>>
Psychological  Profiles   /  25 
finger  at  you  and  saying,  "You  are  at  a  turning  point  and  your  life 
is  going  to  change."  I  look  at  yods  positively  I  equate  them  to 
someone  who  is  an  understudy  for  a  famous  actress  or  actor  and 
who  fills  in  for  the  star  one  night  and  becomes  an  overnight  sen- 
sation. That  is  how  a  yod  operates.  I  have  one  and  that  is  how  it 
has  worked  in  my  life.  When  I  was  a  new  astrologer,  my  yod  was 
being  set  off  and  my  life  changed.  I  spoke  on  my  view  of  eclipses 
at  an  American  Federation  of  Astrologers  (AFA)  convention.  Up 
to  that  point,  few  astrologers  had  lectured  on  them.  I  worked  hard 
on  my  lecture,  and  fifty  people  attended  the  first  one.  At  the  next 
lecture  I  drew  a  hundred  and  fifty  people.  By  the  third  lecture  I 
had  five  hundred  people  in  attendance.  I  was  described  as  an  up- 
and-coming  astrologer  in  some  publications  and  was  appointed  to 
the  AFA  board  of  directors.  My  career  has  flourished  ever  since. 
A  yod  can  also  be  negative.  People  with  yods  seem  to  have 
more  than  their  share  of  health  problems,  but  they  also  seem  to 
have  the  ability  to  regenerate  themselves.  I  always  have  little 
things  wrong  with  me,  but  by  the  time  I  get  to  the  doctor,  they 
are  usually  gone.  Something  life-altering  always  happens  when 
my  yod  is  activated.  When  I  was  diagnosed  with  cancer,  my  yod 
was  set  off.  When  I  went  through  a  divorce,  my  yod  was  set  off".  It 
happened  again  when  I  met  a  certain  someone  who  changed  my 
life  in  a  profound  way,  and  again  when  I  got  married.  Yods  are 
configurations  that  change  your  life,  but  they  do  not  drive  you. 
My  life  often  goes  to  extremes,  but  as  a  person  who  has  two  yods, 
I  see  it  more  as  being  in  the  right  place  at  the  right  time  and  hav- 
ing something  very  exciting  happen.  It's  that  weird  sense  of  fate 
or  kismet.  So,  while  I  do  not  consider  a  yod  to  be  a  driver  per  se,  it 
certainly  is  important. 
Ease  in  the  Chart 
when  assessing  someone's  natal  promise,  astrologers  should  also 
look  for  things  that  make  a  client's  life  pleasant  and  easy  I  once 
had  an  astrologer  tell  me,  "Wherever  Jupiter  is  placed,  you  will  have 

<<<PAGE 40>>>
26    /    Psychological  Profiles 
abundance.  Wherever  you  have  Venus,  you  will  have  ease."  But  the 
flip  side  to  this  can  be  overindulgence  and  laziness.  My  antenna 
goes  up  when  I  see  a  chart  that  has  Venus  trine  Jupiter.  These 
people  are  often  lucky,  but  they  can  make  mistakes.  Fortunately  for 
them,  when  they  do  make  mistakes  they  often  come  out  smelling 
like  a  rose.  Even  Venus  square  Jupiter  can  be  lucky.  People  with  this 
aspect  will  land  on  their  feet  and  not  face  the  same  lessons  that  a 
Sun-square-Saturn  person  will  face.  The  same  thing  is  true  with  a 
Grand  Trine.  The  Grand  Trine  (three  planets  in  elemental  har- 
mony) is  certainly  a  karmic  gift.  It  involves  a  lot  of  ease,  but  with- 
out a  lot  of  reinforcing  tension  it  will  often  result  in  people  who 
won't  "go  for  the  gold."  They  sit  back,  relax,  and  let  life  come  to 
them. 
I  have  the  Moon  trine  Venus  in  my  natal  chart,  and  this  aspect 
has  always  has  been  very  good  to  me.  When  I  walk  into  a  hall  to 
lecture,  people  are  more  inclined  to  like  me  than  to  dislike  me. 
There  is  a  certain  public  appeal  that  the  Moon  trine  Venus  gives 
me.  With  this  aspect,  the  negative  side  is  to  make  sure  that  you 
prepare  well  for  the  task  at  hand  since  acceptance  can  be  unusu- 
ally easy. 
Easy  aspects  are  not  as  important  as  squares,  but  when  they  are 
triggered,  something  nice  will  usually  happen  to  your  client.  I  re- 
cently did  a  research  project  on  lottery  winners.  It  was  not  a  big  un- 
dertaking, but  I  did  find  that  winners  had  a  Venus /Jupiter  aspect 
natally.  This  is  something  I  address  in  chapter  2  on  the  natal 
promise.  If  the  promise  is  not  there  natally,  it's  probably  not  going 
to  happen.  I  don't  have  that  kind  of  luck  promised  in  my  chart,  so  I 
quit  buying  lottery  tickets  a  long  time  ago.  However,  Jupiter  was 
stationing  trine  my  angles  when  I  was  on  a  cruise  and  I  won  eight 
jackpots  playing  video  poker.  I  also  won  at  bingo,  and  I  am  some- 
one who  rarely  wins.  So  even  unlucky  people  can  have  good  things 
happen  when  the  heavens  produce  the  right  aspects.  But  I  will  not 
count  on  ever  being  a  big  winner. 
Clients  who  have  charts  with  many  easy  aspects  often  lack 
drive.  They  will  settle  for  whatever  comes  along,  such  as  staying 

<<<PAGE 41>>>
Psychological  Profiles    /  27 
in  the  same  old  job  forever.  These  clients  also  stay  in  the  same 
marriage  even  if  it  is  bad,  and  will  tend  to  stay  stuck  forever  if 
there  is  not  a  stimulus  such  as  a  square  to  motivate  them  to  break 
out  and  change  their  life.  They'll  need  a  lot  of  tension  from  pro- 
gressions and  transits  to  bring  about  positive  change,  otherwise 
they  won't  make  a  shift. 
When  I  began  practicing  astrology,  I  learned  that  a  Grand 
Trine  is  a  wonderful  gift.  It  can  indicate  real  talent  and  very  special 
abilities.  When  I  started  out  in  private  practice,  I  found  that 
people  with  Grand  Water  Trines  had  artistic  ability,  but  some- 
times did  nothing  with  it.  I  was  shocked  when  I  encountered 
people  with  Grand  Earth  Trines  who  were  on  welfare.  They  did 
not  feel  that  they  had  to  work.  I  also  see  it  with  women  who 
marry  successful  men  who  take  care  of  them.  I  had  a  client  with  a 
Grand  Air  Trine  who  got  into  terrible  trouble.  All  his  life  he  could 
talk  his  way  in  and  out  of  anything.  He  thought  he  could  do  it  one 
more  time,  but  he  ended  up  in  jail. 
Of  all  the  Grand  Trines,  I  do  find  the  Grand  Fire  Trine  to  be 
the  most  beneficial  because  it  seems  to  endow  the  person  with 
courage.  These  people  are  risk  takers  and  have  a  lot  of  fun.  But 
even  with  the  Grand  Trine,  they  won  t  reach  their  greatest  poten- 
tial without  reinforcing  squares.  They  have  an  abundance  of  en- 
ergy and  keep  themselves  very  busy.  They're  warm  and  charming, 
and  people  respond  to  them  positively,  but  they  are  also  used  to 
having  everything  fall  into  their  laps.  They  take  for  granted  what 
other  people  have  to  work  very  hard  for.  They  just  assume  that 
life  is  easy  for  everybody.  They  don't  understand  why  someone 
may  hesitate  or  analyze  before  stepping  forward,  because  they're 
used  to  taking  risks  and  coming  out  on  top.  They  simply  won't 
achieve  their  greatest  potential  without  reinforcing  squares.  Often 
they  don't  recognize  their  limits,  so  they  burn  out. 
I  have  seen  people  with  Grand  Earth  Trines  go  bankrupt. 
Money  comes  to  them  so  easily  that  they  become  careless  or  don't 
take  the  proper  precautions  to  protect  their  finances.  I  had  clients 

<<<PAGE 42>>>
28    /    Psychological  Profiles 
who  were  investment  brokers  who  thought  they  were  going  to 
profit  forever  and  didn't. 
People  with  Grand  Water  Trines  have  an  emotional  self-con- 
tentment, and  many  times  their  creativity  tends  to  be  more  internal 
rather  than  something  they  put  into  tangible  form  and  share  with 
the  world.  They  have  enormous  creativity,  but  use  it  only  for 
their  own  enjoyment.  They  can  be  emotionally  fulfilled  within 
themselves  and  may  end  up  being  loners.  They  often  are  content 
living  alone  because  they  are  self-contained  and  emotionally  self- 
sufficient. 
The  Grand  Air  Trine  denotes  an  able  communicator  who  can 
process  information  easily  and  comfortably,  but  IVe  also  seen 
many  people  with  this  aspect  who  attend  school  forever  and  never 
do  anything  in  the  real  world.  They  get  hooked  on  the  learning 
process.  They  can  reach  age  fifty  without  ever  really  working  a 
job.  I  have  a  client  with  a  Ph.D.  who  did  postdoctoral  work,  but 
has  never  worked.  He  enjoys  learning  more  than  utilizing  the  in- 
formation. He  lives  frugally  on  a  small  inheritance.  People  with 
Grand  Air  Trines  have  great  intellectual  ability,  sometimes  lack 
common  sense,  and  often  neglect  their  physical  well-being.  They 
know  a  lot  about  many  different  things.  They  study  and  read  vo- 
raciously, but  they  are  not  doers.  They  don  t  know  how  to  get  out 
of  their  minds  and  manifest  their  work  in  the  material  world. 
Those  with  a  Grand  Fire  Trine  can  be  too  rash  and  take  too 
many  chances,  like  a  fireman  who  rushes  back  into  a  burning 
building  at  great  personal  risk.  They  feel  they  have  nine  lives. 
They  can  be  impulsive,  but  sometimes  can  survive  things  that 
other  people  cannot.  I  had  a  client  who  lived  through  a  German 
concentration  camp  and  then  went  back  to  Hungary.  His  Grand 
Fire  Trine  and  the  help  of  a  good  astrologer  later  got  him  to  safety 
when  he  needed  to  escape  from  the  Communists.  He  also  had 
good  reinforcing  squares.  He  then  came  to  the  United  States  and 
started  a  business  that  became  very  successful.  People  with  Grand 
Trines  are  very  lucky,  but  they  also  need  a  driver,  such  as  a  T- 
Square,  to  push  them  along  to  greatness. 

<<<PAGE 43>>>
Chapter  Two 
The  Natal  Promise 
^he  previous  chapter  examined  the  psychological  patterns  and 
profiles  an  astrologer  must  consider  before  predicting.  What  is 
promised  in  the  natal  chart  is  also  important.  Most  of  what  hap- 
pens in  our  lives  is  shown  quite  clearly  in  the  natal  promise. 
Consider  why  clients  consult  astrologers.  Most  clients  want  to 
know  about  love  and  marriage,  career,  business,  money,  health, 
and  children.  It  is  an  astrologer  s  job  to  determine  the  potential 
for  each.  Then  the  astrologer  must  determine  if  and  when  a  stim- 
ulus will  come  along  to  actualize  that  potential.  However,  that  po- 
tential must  be  found  in  the  natal  chart  first. 
Is  marriage  promised  in  the  natal  chart?  Is  divorce?  Many 
people  ask  these  questions.  They  may  want  to  get  married.  They 
may  want  to  get  divorced.  But  if  it's  not  promised,  it's  not  going 
to  happen.  Other  clients  may  want  to  know  about  success,  fame, 
or  money.  These  things  don't  happen  without  luck  in  the  natal 
29 

<<<PAGE 44>>>
30    /    The  Natal  Promise 
chart.  A  prominent  Jupiter,  a  strong  Sagittarius  influence,  or  a 
strong  fifth  house  indicate  the  natal  promise  of  luck.  Clients  will 
often  want  to  know  good  days  to  buy  lottery  tickets  or  good  days 
to  gamble.  If  they  don't  have  that  potential  in  their  natal  chart, 
nothing  is  going  to  happen.  However,  if  they  do  have  a  lucky  chart, 
a  good  astrologer  can  certainly  tell  when  things  will  happen. 
Sometimes  fear  is  a  burning  issue.  Is  violence  or  rape  a  possi- 
bility? The  potential  for  this  is  indicated  in  a  chart,  too.  Mars  and 
Pluto  can  show  if  and  when  a  rape,  assault,  violence,  or  even 
emotional  abuse  could  happen.  The  astrologer's  role  is  to  help  the 
client  sidestep  these  aspects. 
Are  serious  health  issues  indicated  in  the  natal  chart?  A  person 
is  not  going  to  get  a  serious  illness  no  matter  what  is  happening 
with  the  transits  and  progressions  if  it's  not  promised  in  the  natal 
chart. 
Clients  often  want  to  know  about  relationships.  Will  they  have 
one,  and  when?  Relationships  are  particularly  tricky  because  the 
potential  has  to  be  promised  in  two  charts,  the  client's  chart  and 
that  of  the  other  person  involved.  The  astrologer  must  synthesize 
the  two. 
Where  career  is  concerned,  I  think  it's  important  to  realize  that 
some  people  are  destined  to  have  a  powerful,  important  career 
and  others  are  not.  Some  people  don't  have  the  impetus,  drive,  or 
desire  to  climb  mountains.  They  may  instead  be  meant  to  focus 
on  other  things  in  their  lives  like  raising  children.  Early  in  my  life  I 
was  driven  by  my  career,  and  I  was  inclined  to  encourage  my 
clients  to  do  bigger  and  better  things  professionally.  It  took  me  a 
while  to  realize  that  each  person's  destiny  or  mission  is  unique.  I 
learned  I  should  not  project  my  drives  onto  others,  because  it  was 
more  important  for  them  to  concentrate  on  and  develop  other 
areas  of  their  lives. 

<<<PAGE 45>>>
The  Natal  Promise   /  31 
Marriage 
It  has  always  been  my  belief  that  if  clients  want  to  marry,  they  can. 
Some  charts  are  more  resistant  to  marriage  than  others.  Strong 
Aries,  Gemini,  Sagittarius,  and  Aquarius  seem  to  have  less  need  for 
partnerships  than  other  signs.  They're  self-sufficient  and  want  to 
be  free.  In  contrast,  someone  with  prominent  Libra  is  rarely  with- 
out a  relationship.  Natal  promise  will  indicate  people  who  want  to 
be  free  and  don  t  want  to  be  married,  and  people  who  cannot  be 
without  a  partner.  Clients  will  claim  they  want  to  be  married,  but 
the  astrologer  may  find  they  are  not  doing  anything  to  make  it 
happen.  This  is  also  shown  in  the  chart.  I  have  never  known  Prince 
Charming  to  come  and  knock  on  anyone's  door,  so  it's  important 
to  advise  clients  who  want  someone  significant  in  their  lives  to  get 
out  and  do  things  to  meet  people. 
The  Sun  will  describe  the  men  in  a  woman's  life  and  the  Moon 
will  describe  the  women  in  a  man's  life.  One  thing  that  will  bring  a 
lot  of  marriages  is  Sagittarius  on  the  seventh-house  cusp  or  Jupiter 
in  the  seventh  house.  Part  of  the  reason  these  people  marry  often  is 
because  they're  optimistic,  buoyant,  and  enthusiastic  about  jump- 
ing into  an  alliance,  and  they  often  lack  discrimination.  The  oppo- 
site is  true  when  Capricorn  is  on  the  seventh-house  cusp  or  Saturn 
is  placed  there.  Because  these  people  are  naturally  cautious  in  rela- 
tionships, they  may  limit  their  own  marriage  opportunities. 
I  have  two  clients  who  are  astral  twins,  meaning  they  were  born 
on  the  same  day,  just  a  few  minutes  apart.  However,  when  it  comes 
to  just  a  few  minutes,  the  chart  can  be  different  enough  to  change  a 
life  significantly.  One  twin  has  Jupiter  in  the  seventh,  the  other  has 
Jupiter  in  the  eighth.  Both  have  a  cardinal  T-Square  with  Jupiter 
square  a  Sun /Uranus  conjunction  square  Neptune.  Neither  client  is 
comfortable  with  peaceful,  realistic  relationships.  At  the  start  of  any 
liaison,  both  are  overly  optimistic,  but  after  a  while  their  relation- 
ships or  marriages  begin  to  sour.  The  client  with  Jupiter  in  the  sev- 
enth married  five  times  by  the  time  she  was  thirty-five  years  old. 

<<<PAGE 46>>>
32    /    The  Natal  Promise 
The  woman  with  Jupiter  in  the  eighth  has  only  been  married  once, 
but  she  and  her  husband  lead  totally  separate  lives.  Because  Jupiter 
is  in  the  eighth  house  of  joint  finances,  their  relationship  is  based 
primarily  on  financial  security. 
As  astral  twins,  much  of  what  happens  in  their  lives  is  parallel. 
But  their  lives  demonstrate  the  difference  between  Jupiter  in  the 
seventh  versus  the  eighth.  If  a  client  asks  if  he  or  she  will  marry- 
again,  an  astrologer  can  almost  always  say  yes  if  Jupiter  is  in  the 
seventh  house  or  is  the  ruler  of  the  seventh.  The  astrologer  should 
also  remember  that  a  client  with  Jupiter  placed  there  is  less  discrim- 
inating, more  hopeful,  more  impulsive,  and  more  willing  to  take 
chances  in  relationships.  It  is  also  important  to  note  that  if  Jupiter  is 
retrograde,  marriage  prospects  are  much  less  likely,  because  with 
Jupiter  retrograde  what  is  promised  is  often  times  not  delivered. 
When  the  Capricorn  principle  is  connected  to  the  seventh 
house,  the  person  may  be  inclined  to  find  fault  with  potential 
partners.  I  have  a  client  whose  seventh-house  cusp  is  in  Capricorn. 
He  is  a  very  handsome  and  successful  doctor.  He  would  spend 
every  session  complaining  about  his  Capricorn  wife.  He  cheated 
on  her  the  whole  time  I  knew  him.  After  about  fifteen  years  his 
wife  finally  just  left.  He  then  proceeded  to  fall  apart  and  now 
laments  that  he'll  never  find  anyone  like  her  and  that  no  woman 
ever  measures  up  to  her.  He,  like  others  with  their  seventh-house 
cusps  in  Capricorn,  fears  being  disappointed  or  hurt,  so  he  finds 
reasons  why  a  relationship  won't  work.  It  is  also  Capricorn's  in- 
nate ability  to  plan  ahead  and  see  the  pluses  and  minuses  of  any 
situation  that  prompts  these  people  to  rationalize  themselves  out 
of  anything. 
Another  client  with  Capricorn  on  the  seventh-house  cusp  al- 
ways falls  for  women  who  are  not  available.  They  are  either  mar- 
ried, much  older,  or  in  a  different  financial  bracket.  These  are 
women  he  can  fantasize  about,  but  relationships  with  them  are 
not  likely  to  materialize.  A  key  element  in  his  selection  is  that  the 
woman  is  often  older,  more  mature,  and  definitely  further  along 
career- wise. 

<<<PAGE 47>>>
The  Natal  Promise   /  33 
One  of  the  women  he  has  been  fantasizing  about  is  getting  di- 
vorced and  he  is  suddenly  finding  all  sorts  of  problems  with  her 
because  she  is  free.  It's  clear  that  he  creates  the  obstacles  to  a  com- 
mitted relationship.  Interestingly,  if  a  man  with  Capricorn  on  the 
seventh-house  cusp  marries,  many  times  it  is  to  a  woman  who  has 
her  Sun  or  Moon  in  Capricorn  or  who  is  quite  a  bit  older  and 
more  mature  and  can  nurture  him.  Or  he  may  marry  a  woman 
much,  much  younger,  but  rarely  a  peer.  I  do  not  see  the  same 
problems  with  women  with  Cancer  rising.  They  seem  to  express 
the  same  energy  in  a  more  comfortable  manner.  Some  signs,  As- 
cendants, and  aspects  may  be  difficult  for  one  sex,  but  not  for  the 
other.  For  example.  Cancer  placements  are  easier  for  women,  and 
Aries  placements  are  more  comfortable  for  men. 
Let's  take  a  look  at  what  creates  the  potential  for  marriage  in  a 
natal  chart.  There  are  a  number  of  factors  that  indicate  many 
marriages  or  many  opportunities  for  marriage.  The  following  are 
the  ones  that  I  use  the  most: 
Classic  Natal  Indicators  of  Marriage  Potential 
•  Aspects  to  and  from  the  Sun  in  a  woman's  chart,  or  to  and 
from  the  Moon  in  a  man  s  chart 
•  Applying  aspects  from  the  ruler  of  the  seventh  house 
•  Planets  in  the  seventh  house  and  their  aspects 
•  An  interception  in  the  seventh  house  indicates  multiple 
marriages 
The  relationship  between  the  rulers  of  the  first  and  seventh 
houses,  either  natally  or  by  progression,  show  how  clients  behave 
or  what  they  need  in  a  relationship.  I  had  a  client  come  to  me 
whose  rulers  of  the  first  and  the  seventh  houses  were  square  by 
progression.  (Her  Ascendant  was  in  Sagittarius,  so  her  seventh- 
house  cusp  fell  in  Gemini.  When  she  consulted  me,  her  pro- 
gressed Mercury  was  in  Gemini  squaring  Jupiter  in  Pisces.  Mer- 
cury is  the  natural  ruler  of  Gemini,  and  Jupiter  is  the  natural  ruler 

<<<PAGE 48>>>
34    /    The  Natal  Promise 
of  Sagittarius.)  I  found  out  that  she  was  pushing  to  get  married.  I 
advised  her  to  wait  because  her  progressions  were  not  supporting 
a  union  at  that  time.  She  went  ahead  anyway.  She  got  the  ring  and 
set  the  date,  but  because  the  rulers  were  squaring  each  other,  the 
marriage  never  came  off.  This  was  a  very  interesting  test  for  me. 
This  woman  was  very  close  to  me,  and  as  the  invitations  were  sent 
out.  the  band  was  hired,  and  everything  seemed  to  be  a  go,  I  kept 
saying  to  my  husband,  "I  just  don  t  understand.  I  am  not  going  to 
buy  a  new  dress  until  after  the  second  weekend  in  September." 
Well,  that  lunation  triggered  the  progression  and  they  ended  the 
engagement.  I  felt  badly  for  them,  but  I  didn't  have  to  burn  my  as- 
trolog}-  books. 
The  relationship  between  the  Sun  and  Moon  illustrate  how  the 
masculine  and  feminine  principles  work  together  in  each  client.  It 
shows  how  the  client  behaves  in  relationships,  but  it  does  not  nec- 
essarily show  the  number  of  marriages.  The  relationship  between 
Venus  and  Mars  is  just  as  important  because  they  are  the  natural 
rulers  of  the  first  and  the  seventh  houses.  They  show  a  client's 
need  for  affection  and  whether  love  works  with  or  against  the 
client's  desires. 
Mars  in  a  woman's  chart  further  describes  the  kind  of  man  she 
will  attract,  while  Venus  in  a  man's  chart  further  defines  the  typt 
of  woman  he's  in  tune  w^ith. 
Many  clients  will  want  to  know  if  a  relationship  will  lead  to 
marriage.  There  are  several  ways  to  determine  this.  In  90  percent 
of  the  charts  I  have  done,  I  have  seen  the  potential  for  marriage 
shown  in  the  following  way:  For  a  woman,  the  number  of  apply- 
ing aspects  the  Sun  makes  before  it  leaves  a  sign  will  give  the  num- 
ber of  potential  marriages.  For  a  man,  it's  the  applying  aspects  the 
Moon  makes  before  it  leaves  a  sign. 
This  is  a  technique  I  learned  as  a  young  astrologer  from  older, 
practicing  astrologers.  Over  the  years  I  have  found  it  doesn't  work 
100  percent  of  the  time,  but  it  is  a  useful  guideline.  Here's  how  it 
works: 

<<<PAGE 49>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  35 
Determining  the  Number  of  Potential  Marriages 
•  I  use  only  the  major  applying  natal  aspects;  that  is,  the  con- 
junction, square,  opposition,  trine,  and  sextile. 
•  When  calculating  the  number  of  potential  marriages  for  a 
woman,  I  look  at  the  applying  aspects  her  natal  Sun  makes 
before  it  leaves  a  sign.  The  Sun  can  only  apply  to  the  slower- 
moving  planets — Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  Neptune, 
and  Pluto. 
•  The  Moon  can  apply  to  the  Sun,  and  I  have  seen  this  aspect 
work  to  indicate  a  potential  marriage. 
•  Mercury  and  Venus  can  also  apply  to  the  Sun.  However, 
what  happens  is  that  these  aspects  are  expressed  most  often 
as  close  alliances  that  don  t  end  up  at  the  altar.  They  seem  to 
work  by  bringing  opportunities  for  marriage,  but  not  neces- 
sarily an  actual  marriage. 
•  When  calculating  the  number  of  potential  marriages  for  a 
man,  I  look  at  the  applying  aspects  his  natal  Moon  makes  be- 
fore it  leaves  a  sign.  It  is  possible  for  the  Moon  to  apply  to  all 
the  other  planets  if  it  is  in  an  early  degree. 
•  I  usually  consider  only  the  applying  aspects  between  the  lu- 
minaries (the  Sun  and  Moon)  and  planets,  but  I  have  seen  the 
Sun  and  Moon  in  applying  aspect  to  the  nodes  indicate  a 
strong  karmic  relationship.  This  is  not  a  marriage  aspect,  but 
is  definitely  a  strong  karmic  tie. 
•  I  have  found  that  the  stronger  aspects  will  be  expressed  first. 
For  instance,  when  the  luminary  is  in  a  wide  applying  con- 
junction to  a  planet,  this  is  a  very  strong  aspect  and  will  be  ex- 
pressed before  a  sextile,  even  though  the  planet  in  sextile  as- 
pect may  be  closer  in  aspect — the  strength  of  a  conjunction 
outweighs  that  of  a  sextile.  So  this  means  that  a  conjunction 
(the  strongest  aspect)  would  describe  the  first  marriage  and 
partner  before  a  sextile  would.  However,  all  of  the  aspects  to 

<<<PAGE 50>>>
36    /    The  Natal  Promise 
the  Sun  or  Moon,  both  applying  and  separating,  will  some- 
what describe  all  of  the  partners  a  client  normally  attracts. 
Case  Study:  Carol  Rushman 
My  Sun  applies  to  Neptune,  Pluto,  and  Jupiter,  so  three  marriages 
are  promised.  My  Sun  and  Neptune  are  conjunct  at  9°  Vkgo.  I  have 
Pluto  at  24°  Cancer,  in  an  applying  sextile  from  my  Sun.  I  have 
Jupiter  at  28°  Virgo,  an  applying  conjunction.  I  have  Mercury  at  1° 
Virgo  (an  applying  conjunction), ^but  as  I  said  above  I  do  not  find 
that  Mercur}^  applying  to  the  Sun  promises  a  marriage.  It  could  in- 
dicate a  possible  alliance,  but  not  a  marriage.  I  also  have  Mars  at  5° 
Scorpio  (a  separating  sextile).  Those  are  my  main  aspects.  I  have 
some  minor  aspects  that  are  not  as  important.  The  Sun  conjunct 
Neptune  is  my  first  applying  aspect,  and  my  first  husband  was 
Pisces  rising  (Neptune  rules  Pisces).  I  had  a  significant  relationship 
with  a  Pluto  person,  which  would  be  my  second  applying  aspect. 
Then  I  married  a  man  who  is  Sagittarius  rising  with  Jupiter  at  28° 
Pisces,  and  that  describes  the  third  aspect.  I  have  found  that  the 
parmer's  rising  sign  seems  to  describe  the  aspect  more  often  than 
his  or  her  Sun  sign. 
It's  important  to  remember  that  the  number  of  applying  aspects 
does  not  include  marriage  opportunities.  I  have  three  applying  as- 
pects from  my  Sun,  but  overall  I  have  had  seven  or  eight  marriage 
proposals.  The  number  of  applying  aspects  involving  the  Sun  or 
Moon  shows  the  number  of  times  you  could  actually  marry.  I  had 
several  opportunities  before  I  married  my  first  husband  and  a  few 
more  before  I  married  my  second  husband.  But  I  will  probably 
marry  only  twice,  possibly  three  times,  because  that  is  the  num- 
ber of  applying  aspects  from  my  Sun. 
Let's  look  at  a  few  more  examples  of  some  famous  women  so 
that  it  is  very  clear  how  to  do  this. 

<<<PAGE 51>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  37 
Carol  Rushman 
September  2,  1933  /  3:55  p.m.  CST 
Milwaukee,  WI 

<<<PAGE 52>>>
38    /    The  Natal  Promise 
Case  Study:  Jacqueline  Kennedy  Onassis 
Jacqueline  Kennedy  Onassis'  chart  promises  three  marriages.  Her 
chart  is  fascinating  in  that  the  marriages  described  are  very  literal. 
First,  her  Sun  at  5°  Leo  is  in  an  applying  sextile  to  Jupiter  at  9° 
Gemini,  and  John  F.  Kennedy  was  a  Gemini.  Then  her  Sun  is  in  an 
applying  trine  to  Uranus  at  1 1°  Aries,  and  Aristotle  Onassis  was  an 
Aries.  Next,  there  is  a  wide  applying  trine  to  Saturn  at  24°  Sagit- 
tarius. This,  I  think,  describes  Maurice  Templesman.  Their  rela- 
tionship was  very  much  like  a  marriage  even  though  they  never  le- 
galized it.  Her  Saturn  is  in  her  second  house  and  she  met  him 
because  he  was  her  financial  counselor.  Mercury  at  2°  Leo  is  in  an 
applying  conjunction  to  her  Sun.  This  indicates  the  many  oppor- 
tunities she  had  to  marry,  but  chose  not  to  act  on. 

<<<PAGE 53>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  39 
Jacqueline  Kennedy  Onassis 
July  28,  1929  /  2:30  p.m.  EST 
South  Hempstead,  NY 

<<<PAGE 54>>>
40    /    The  Natal  Promise 
Another  example  is  Grace  Kelly,  whose  Sun  at  19°  Scorpio 
makes  only  one  applying  aspect — it  conjuncts  Mars  at  25°  Scorpio. 
This  was  her  marriage  to  Prince  Rainier  of  Monaco.  Rainier  is  a 
Gemini,  but  he  certainly  looks  like  he  is  Scorpio  or  Aries  rising,  de- 
scribed by  that  Mars.  Her  Mercury  at  10°  Scorpio  is  in  an  applying 
conjunction  to  her  Sun,  and  her  Sun  is  in  a  Grand  Water  Trine 
with  the  Moon  and  Pluto  (both  separating  aspects).  While  these  as- 
pects talk  about  her  opportunities  to  marry,  the  Sun  conjunct  Mars 
was  her  one  marriage. 
It's  important  to  realize  that  all  of  the  aspects  to  the  Sun,  both 
applying  and  separating,  will  somewhat  describe  all  of  the  part- 
ners, even  most  of  the  men  a  woman  attracts.  Again,  let's  look  at 
the  applying  aspects  to  my  luminary.  The  Sun  conjunct  Neptune 
has  been  consistently  expressed  by  the  men  with  whom  IVe  been 
involved.  My  first  husband  has  Pisces  rising,  and  my  second  hus- 
band's Ascendant  ruler  is  Jupiter  in  Pisces.  He  has  a  Ph.D.  in 
chemistry.  Many  of  the  men  I  have  dated  have  fallen  into  one  of 
two  Neptune  categories:  They've  been  either  spiritual  or  creative. 
Many  have  been  musicians. 
The  second  aspect  is  Sun  sextile  Pluto.  Both  of  my  husbands  are 
powerful  men  and  have  a  certain  need  to  be  in  control.  I  did  date 
several  Scorpio  men  (Pluto  rules  Scorpio).  All  of  the  men  I  have 
dated  have  been  very  powerful.  Then  my  third  aspect  from  the  Sun 
is  to  Jupiter.  The  man  I'm  married  to  now  and  with  whom  I  am  ex- 
tremely happy  has  Sagittarius  rising.  He's  very  well  educated,  a 
world  traveler,  and  quite  philosophical.  Both  of  my  husbands  be- 
came very  wealthy  All  of  the  men  I  have  been  with  are  described  to 
a  certain  extent  by  the  Sun /Jupiter  aspect.  They  are  all  travelers. 
They  are  all  very  intelligent  and  very  spiritual  in  their  own  way. 
With  Mercury  applying  to  the  Sun,  I  dated  several  Gemini  and 
Virgo  men,  and  men  who  were  younger.  My  Sun  sextiles  Mars  in 
Scorpio.  Since  the  separating  aspects  also  describe  the  men  you 
draw  in,  that  has  worked  too.  I  have  Mars  at  5°  Scorpio.  The  men  in 
my  life  have  been  very  sexual,  intense,  driven,  and  powerful. 

<<<PAGE 55>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  41 
In  a  man  s  chart,  all  of  the  aspects  to  the  Moon,  both  applying 
and/ or  separating,  will  describe  all  of  his  women.  Again,  the  ap- 
plying ones  will  describe  the  woman  or  women  he  marries.  All  of 
the  women  in  a  man  s  life  will  have  qualities  and  characteristics 
that  are  the  same.  I  have  a  client  whose  Moon  is  in  Cancer  exactly 
conjunct  his  Pluto.  The  Moon  trines  his  Mercury  and  Sun  in  Scor- 
pio (both  applying)  and  trines  Venus  in  Scorpio  (separating).  So, 
three  marriages  are  promised.  With  the  Moon /Pluto  conjunction, 
he  selects  very  powerful,  successful  women,  one  a  famous  balle- 
rina, another  a  famous  opera  singer,  and  the  third  a  beautiful 
model.  Because  his  Moon  is  in  Cancer,  he  wants  these  same  power- 
ful women  to  nurture  him,  a  tricky  request  that  has  never  been  sat- 
isfied by  any  of  his  wives.  With  the  trine  to  Mercury  and  the  Sun  in 
Scorpio,  he  needs  them  to  be  magnetic,  intense,  verbal,  and  power- 
ful in  their  own  right.  The  trine  to  Venus  in  Scorpio  brings  him 
charismatic,  intuitive,  creative  women.  Uranus  squaring  his  Moon 
has  given  him  a  restlessness  in  relationships  and  the  potential  for  a 
sudden  split.  In  fact,  all  three  of  his  marriages  ended  in  divorce. 
The  aspects  in  a  client's  chart  will  tell  you  about  his  or  her  po- 
tential partners,  and  if  a  person  does  not  fit  the  profile,  the  rela- 
tionship will  probably  not  amount  to  much.  For  instance,  if  a  man 
has  his  Moon  square  Pluto,  every  woman  he  attracts  will  be  some- 
what castrating,  controlling,  or  manipulative,  or  he  will  elicit  that 
response  in  her.  The  woman  may  not  be  that  way,  but  his  behav- 
ior will  bring  that  out  in  her,  because  that's  how  he  perceived  or 
experienced  his  mother.  That's  all  he  knows,  and  he  will  uncon- 
sciously act  in  ways  that  will  cause  the  familiar  response.  So  even 
a  woman  who  is  not  at  all  inclined  to  be  controlling  may  find  her- 
self acting  that  way.  Or  he  will  be  attracted  to  women  who  are  in- 
deed manipulative. 
By  the  same  token,  a  man  who  has  never  been  abusive  to  a 
woman  in  his  life  may  find  himself  inclined  toward  more  destruc- 
tive behavior  when  he  connects  with  a  woman  who  has  her  Mars 
square  Pluto.  I  had  a  man  come  to  me  who  was  involved  with  a 
woman  who  had  this  aspect,  and  he  said  that  she  brought  out  the 

<<<PAGE 56>>>
42    /    The  Natal  Promise 
worst  in  him.  He  was  shocked  by  this  response,  because  he  had 
never  acted  that  way  toward  a  woman  before. 
It  is  important  for  a  woman  with  her  Mars  square  Pluto  to  find 
a  constructive  way  to  express  this  aspect.  Otherwise  she  could  un- 
consciously act  in  a  way  that  "pushes  her  partner's  buttons,"  or 
she  may  unwittingly  be  attracted  to  someone  who  is  a  more  con- 
trolling person.  This  is  only  one  of  the  ways  this  aspect  can  ex- 
press itself,  and  I  use  it  to  illustrate  a  point.  This  does  not  happen 
to  every  woman  with  her  Mars  square  Pluto.  It's  important  for  all 
clients  with  this  natal  aspect  to  be  aware  that  this  tendency  is  in 
their  chart  and  that  it's  important  to  figure  out  how  to  express  it 
in  a  positive,  healthy  way. 
It's  important  to  remember  that  anyone  can  have  a  successful 
marriage  if  they  are  willing  to  do  the  work.  Negative  patterns 
must  be  broken,  and  in  order  to  be  successful  partners,  we  must 
work  on  ourselves.  We  are  not  stuck  with  the  natal  promise  of  our 
chart.  There  is  always  the  potential  to  outgrow  the  more  difficult 
aspects.  When  I  see  destructive  tendencies  in  clients,  I  encourage 
them  to  seek  counseling  and  to  work  through  their  negativity. 
Another  factor  to  be  aware  of  is  that  Mars  in  every  woman's 
chart  tends  to  describe  her  lovers,  just  as  Venus  in  every  man's  chart 
describes  the  women  to  whom  he  is  naturally  drawn.  Mars  always 
describes  the  men  that  a  woman  will  be  physically  in  tune  with.  A 
woman  who  has  Mars  in  Capricorn  will  be  drawn  to  men  who  have 
position  and  status  and  who  are  also  earthy  and  sexual.  With  Mars 
in  Leo  she  will  want  romantic,  gallant,  self-confident,  dramatic  men 
who  are  generous  and  outgoing.  A  woman  with  Mars  in  Libra  will 
like  men  who  are  romantic,  good-looking,  cultured,  refined,  and 
who  have  good  taste  and  manners.  With  Mars  in  Sagittarius,  she 
will  like  men  who  are  freewheeling,  adventurous,  philosophical, 
smart,  and  exuberant. 
What  kind  of  woman  will  a  man  be  attracted  to?  His  Venus  is 
the  key.  For  example,  a  man  who  has  Venus  in  Aries  will  naturally 
be  drawn  to  high-energy  vital,  Martian  women.  With  Venus  in 
Gemini,  he  will  want  women  who  are  verbal,  talkative,  peppy,  coy, 
intellectual,  and  social.  So  many  men  with  Venus  in  Gemini  have 

<<<PAGE 57>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  43 
said  to  me,  "Vm  involved  with  two  women.  If  I  could  just  wrap 
them  up  into  one,  Td  be  happy."  But,  of  course,  they  could  never 
be  happy  with  one  woman.  A  man  with  Venus  in  Taurus  will  want 
women  who  are  earthy,  stable,  dependable,  sexual,  and  attractive, 
and  have  the  ability  to  earn  a  good  salary.  A  man  with  Venus  in 
Cancer  will  be  attracted  to  women  who  are  nurturing,  sensitive, 
domestic,  and  who  will  mother  him.  A  man  with  Venus  in  Capri- 
corn will  be  much  more  comfortable  with  women  who  have 
achieved  and  who  have  attained  position  and  status  in  the  commu- 
nity, or  with  women  who  come  from  a  prestigious  family  or  who 
have  money. 
Another  way  to  determine  what  clients  want  in  a  marriage 
partner  is  to  look  at  the  sign  on  the  seventh  house  and  the  planet 
ruling  the  seventh  house  and  what  kind  of  aspects  it  makes.  Those 
aspects  add  to  the  description  of  the  type  of  person  who  will  most 
fulfill  that  client's  expectations. 
I  have  the  Moon  ruling  my  seventh  house.  It  conjuncts  the 
North  Node  and  sextiles  Uranus.  It  doesn  t  make  any  bad  aspects, 
but  I  did  get  divorced.  However,  my  ex-husband  did  not  divorce 
me,  I  did  the  divorcing.  It's  in  a  wide  opposition  to  Mercury, 
which  represents  all  the  younger  men  I  didn't  marry.  The  Moon  is 
also  in  a  wide  conjunction  to  Saturn  and  it  trines  Venus.  With  the 
Moon  conjunct  Saturn,  both  of  my  marriages  were  of  a  long  du- 
ration. With  the  trine  to  Venus,  both  men  were  nice-looking,  well 
dressed,  and  cultured. 
The  sign  in  which  the  seventh-house  cusp  falls  also  indicates 
what's  required  in  a  client's  partner.  Those  with  Gemini  on  the  De- 
scendant want  a  partner  who  is  fun,  witty,  smart,  who  has  a  good 
sense  of  humor,  and  who  will  entertain  them.  Those  whose  sev- 
enth-house cusps  are  in  Virgo  want  a  partner  who  is  hard  working 
and  practical,  and  they  also  can  be  very  picky  about  their  partners. 
Clients  with  Aquarius  on  the  Descendant  want  someone  who  is  un- 
usual, unique,  interesting,  and  different. 
Planets  in  the  seventh  house  are  also  important.  They  say  much 
about  the  client's  marriages  and  relationships.  Jupiter  in  the  seventh 

<<<PAGE 58>>>
44    /    The  Natal  Promise 
house  can  indicate  many  marriages,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  because 
these  people  are  willing  to  plunge  in,  take  a  chance,  and  go  for  it. 
Those  with  Saturn  in  the  seventh  will  be  much  more  hesitant,  fear- 
ful, distrustful,  and  circumspect  about  a  commitment.  Saturn  in  the 
seventh  doesn  t  necessarily  indicate  fewer  marital  opportunities,  but 
rather  it  describes  the  person  s  reserve  and  caution.  These  people 
think  through  all  of  the  consequences  of  marriage  and  are  not  as 
willing  to  take  a  chance. 
Those  with  Pluto  in  the  seventh  house  either  take  the  power  or 
give  it  away  in  a  relationship.  Mars  in  the  seventh  indicates  action, 
activity,  or  combat.  The  Moon  in  the  seventh  creates  fluctuations 
in  relationships  and  strong  emotions. 
Another  thing  I  look  at  to  see  if  the  person  can  have  a  success- 
ful marriage  or  not  is  the  relationship  between  the  rulers  of  the 
first  and  seventh  houses.  Are  they  conjunct?  Are  they  trine  or  sex- 
tile?  Are  they  square  or  opposed  to  one  another?  The  rulers  of  my 
first  and  seventh  houses  are  in  the  same  sign  (Aquarius),  so  I  have 
long-lasting  alliances.  With  the  Moon,  ruler  of  my  seventh,  con- 
junct Saturn,  the  ruler  of  my  first,  I  feel  like  my  husband  will  never 
leave  me.  I  feel  very  secure  when  Tm  married  to  someone.  With 
the  ruler  of  the  first  and  the  seventh  trining,  it's  a  very  comfort- 
able, easy  union.  With  a  square  or  opposition,  it  can  work,  but 
problems  will  always  come  up. 
Clients  who  have  been  married  once  don  t  need  as  much 
"push"  from  the  heavens  to  marry  a  second  time.  If  they  have 
been  married  twice,  they  need  even  less  incentive.  If  they Ve  been 
married  three  times,  they  need  very  little  to  trigger  another  union 
(a  progression  and  a  transit  will  do  it).  And  as  we  Ve  discussed,  if  a 
client  has  Sagittarius  on  the  seventh-house  cusp  or  Jupiter  con- 
nected to  the  seventh  house,  his  or  her  optimism  will  expand  mar- 
riage possibilities.  Of  course,  an  afflicted  Jupiter  or  Jupiter  retro- 
grade can  alter  this.  Those  are  important  factors  to  look  at  when 
predicting  a  marriage.  The  astrologer  must  zero  in  on  the  natal 
potential  first  and  then  look  to  see  what's  going  on  with  the  pro- 

<<<PAGE 59>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  45 
gressions  and  transits.  If  it  isn't  promised  natally,  it  won  t  happen 
no  matter  what  is  going  on  by  progression  or  transit. 
Clients  in  their  40s  or  50s  who  have  never  been  married  need  a 
lot  to  pull  it  off.  If  their  chart  does  not  easily  promise  marriage,  I 
usually  find  they  really  don't  want  one.  (It  is  just  like  a  person  who 
has  a  progressed  Venus  square  Mars  or  progressed  Venus  square 
Saturn.  Love  and  relationships  are  often  the  last  thing  they  want  at 
that  point  in  time.)  Occasionally  IVe  still  seen  marriage  happen; 
however,  they  will  need  several  progressions,  reinforcing  transits, 
and  an  eclipse  activating  the  appropriate  parts  of  the  chart.  They 
will  need  a  lot  to  bring  it  about,  and  they  will  have  to  want  it. 
There  are  other  ways  to  see  the  potential  for  more  than  one 
marriage.  Having  mutable  signs  (Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagittarius,  and 
Pisces)  on  the  first  and  seventh-house  axis  usually  indicates  more 
than  one  marriage.  An  interception  in  the  seventh  house  can  be  an- 
other marriage,  and  that  intercepted  sign  might  really  describe  the 
partner.  For  instance,  if  Leo  is  intercepted  in  the  seventh  in  a 
client's  chart,  he  or  she  may  attract  someone  whose  Sun  or  Moon 
is  in  Leo.  I  remember  the  late  astrologer  Katherine  De  Jersey  telling 
me,  "Oh,  I  know  you'll  marry  a  second  time."  I  said,  "Well,  my  Sun 
makes  three  applying  aspects."  She  said,  "Yes,  but  you  also  have  an 
intercepted  seventh  house.  People  with  intercepted  seventh  houses 
almost  always  marry  twice." 
Another  point  that  seems  to  be  up  for  discussion  among  as- 
trologers is  which  houses  describe  the  second,  third,  and  fourth 
marriages.  Everyone  agrees  that  the  seventh  house  is  the  first 
union,  but  when  it  comes  to  more  than  one  marriage,  I  have  my 
own  system  to  determine  which  houses  to  look  at.  This  system  is 
based  on  what  the  late  Louise  Ivy  taught  me.  (She  was  one  of  my 
mentors  and  was  a  very  wise  astrologer.)  The  second  marriage, 
she  said,  is  the  eleventh  house.  Her  reasoning  was  (and  this  is  very 
moralistic  logic),  when  you  marry  someone,  it's  a  union  forever. 
Any  marriage  after  the  first  is  really  a  love  affair.  So  Ivy  would 
count  five  houses  away  from  the  seventh  house  to  the  second 
marriage.  By  the  same  logic,  the  third  marriage  is  five  houses 

<<<PAGE 60>>>
46    /    The  Natal  Promise 
away  from  the  eleventh  and  is  represented  by  the  third  house.  I 
have  found  that  her  premise  does  work.  But  for  any  marriage  an 
astrologer  must  always  look  first  to  the  seventh  house,  because 
that  house  will  always  set  the  tone  for  any  marriage  and  express 
basic  needs  for  partnerships. 
Many  astrologers  look  at  the  ninth  house  to  indicate  the  second 
marriage.  I  think  the  reason  they  go  to  the  ninth  is  because  mar- 
riage is  a  legal  matter.  Because  marriage  means  legalizing  a  union, 
this  house  will  be  active.  But  I  am  inclined  to  describe  the  second 
marriage  by  the  eleventh  house.  It  describes  the  second  marriage 
and  the  second  husband.  This  has  been  true  in  my  own  life.  I  have 
Jupiter  ruling  the  eleventh,  and  my  second  husband  is  so  Jovian — 
well  educated,  spiritual,  and  optimistic.  In  fact,  the  cusp  of  my 
eleventh  house  is  in  the  same  sign  and  degree  as  his  first  house.  I 
have  seen  clients  with  Capricorn  on  the  eleventh  marry  much 
older  business  types  or  Capricorns.  I  have  a  client  whose  eleventh- 
house  cusp  is  at  29°  Cancer,  which  is  the  millionaire's  degree,  and 
her  second  husband  is  a  millionaire  with  his  Sun  in  Cancer.  Some- 
times astrology  is  so  very  literal  that  I'm  stunned  by  it. 
If  there  are  no  applying  aspects  to  the  Sun  or  Moon  in  a  chart, 
or  if  the  luminary  is  in  a  late  degree  (27°,  28°,  or  29°),  I  have  found 
that  anything  can  happen  when  it  comes  to  marriage.  It's  truly  up 
to  the  person  to  realize  the  potential.  I  do  consider  27°,  28°,  and 
29°  to  be  very  special  degrees.  I  call  them  "wild-card"  degrees.  I 
feel  that  clients  can  get  anything  out  of  this  placement  that  they 
want  if  they  are  willing  to  go  for  it. 
Divorce 
Another  issue  clients  frequently  ask  about  is  divorce.  Many  times, 
getting  divorced  is  a  lot  harder  than  getting  married.  Clients  need 
divorce  potential  in  their  chart,  especially  if  they  have  a  lot  of  fixed 
signs  natally.  Divorce  has  to  be  promised  natally.  I  have  had  a  num- 
ber of  people  come  to  me  who  were  unhappily  married  but  who 
had  no  promise  for  divorce  in  their  natal  chart.  These  individuals 

<<<PAGE 61>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  47 
were  miserable  in  their  marriages  but  couldn't  seem  to  get  out.  I 
have  seen  them  separate  for  a  while  but  they  end  up  getting  back 
together  and  stay  locked  in  an  unhappy  state. 
Let's  examine  what  indicates  the  potential  for  divorce  in  a  chart. 
Classic  Natal  Indicators  of  Divorce 
•  Uranus  connected  to  the  seventh  house  in  some  way:  either 
ruling  the  seventh,  in  the  seventh,  or  aspecting  the  ruler  of 
the  seventh. 
•  Strong  natal  Uranus  aspects  in  the  chart.  Uranus  is  a  selfish 
planet.  It  wants  things  on  its  own  terms,  so  a  person  with 
strong  Uranus  energy  can  have  a  difficult  time  understanding 
what  he  or  she  needs  to  do  to  make  an  intimate  relationship 
work. 
•  Venus,  Mars,  or  the  Sun  in  hard  natal  aspect  (square  or  oppo- 
sition) to  Uranus. 
•  The  Sun  square  the  Moon  natally. 
•  Venus  square  Mars  natally. 
•  The  rulers  of  the  first  and  the  seventh  houses  square  to  each 
other  natally 
•  A  strong  natal  Pluto  influence  can  certainly  create  power 
struggles.  Strong  natal  Neptune  influences  indicate  deception 
and  self-delusion.  A  prominent  Uranus  pushes  the  person  to 
be  free  and  live  life  on  his  or  her  own  terms. 
Here  are  some  other  factors  to  take  into  consideration  when  de- 
termining the  potential  for  divorce: 
Uranus  in  some  way,  shape,  or  form  is  usually  involved  with  di- 
vorce. Pluto  breaks  down  and  rebuilds,  and  Neptune  dissolves,  but 
it's  Uranus  or  Aquarius  that  breaks  out,  breaks  free,  and  wants  to 
do  it's  own  thing.  It  doesn't  want  to  be  encumbered.  Rarely  will 
anyone  ever  get  divorced  without  heavy-duty  Uranus  activation, 
and  that  will  show  in  the  natal  chart  as  well  as  in  progressions  and 
transits  for  that  time.  Also,  divorce  has  got  to  show  somehow  in 

<<<PAGE 62>>>
48    /    The  Natal  Promise 
the  seventh  house,  or  be  tied  to  the  seventh  house  or  to  the  sev- 
enth-house ruler. 
Uranus  involved  in  a  transit  or  progression  can  trigger  a  split. 
When  Venus  or  the  Sun  comes  up  and  squares  Uranus,  that's 
often  when  the  natal  promise  of  divorce  will  manifest. 
When  any  personal  planet  (Sun,  Mercury,  Venus,  or  Mars) 
comes  up  by  progression  into  hard  aspect  to  Uranus,  it  can  trigger 
a  divorce.  Again,  it  has  to  be  promised  natally.  If  divorce  is  not 
promised,  it  could  be  a  time  of  separation  for  the  couple.  It  could 
be  a  time  when  careers  force  them  to  have  a  bicoastal  relationship. 
What  happens  for  the  person  is  a  very  big  change  in  the  area  that 
the  planet  represents.  With  the  Sun  it's  an  ego  shift,  with  Mercury 
it's  a  change  in  mental  attitude,  with  Venus  it's  a  modification  of 
emotions  and  love,  and  with  Mars  it's  a  need  to  feel  and  be  free  in 
how  the  person  does  things.  Often  the  person  changes  so  dramat- 
ically that  a  rift  forms  that  cannot  be  repaired. 
A  transit  of  Saturn,  Uranus,  Neptune,  or  Pluto  through  the  first 
or  seventh  house  will  cause  people  to  reevaluate  themselves  or 
their  relationships.  If  one  of  these  planets  transits  the  first  house, 
the  person  will  undergo  tremendous  personal  changes  that  will  im- 
pact their  close  partnerships  or  friendships.  If  it  goes  through  the 
seventh,  the  person  will  reevaluate  his  or  her  relationships.  If  there 
is  a  natal  promise  for  divorce,  again  this  is  the  time  it  could  happen. 
An  intercepted  seventh  house  means  the  person  could  be  mar- 
ried more  than  once.  It  doesn't  necessarily  mean  divorce.  The  per- 
son could  become  a  widow  or  widower. 
When  clients  want  to  know  about  divorce,  something  is  usu- 
ally happening  in  their  chart  or  their  spouse's  chart  causing  them 
to  question  their  marriage  or  putting  their  marriage  on  the  line. 
They  may  be  experiencing  a  Saturn,  Uranus,  Neptune,  or  Pluto 
transit  through  their  first  or  seventh  house,  shaking  up  the 
Me /You  axis.  Or  they  may  have  Venus  square  Mars  by  progres- 
sion, a  classic  divorce  aspect.  They  may  have  a  square  betv,^een  the 
rulers  of  the  first  and  seventh  houses,  either  natally  or  by  progres- 
sion, being  triggered,  another  classic  divorce  aspect.  Or  they  may 
have  a  personal  planet  that  progresses  into  hard  aspect  to  Uranus. 

<<<PAGE 63>>>
The  Natal  Promise   /  49 
Any  of  these  can  cause  clients  to  seriously  question  their  marriage 
and  commitment  to  it. 
If  a  personal  planet  progresses  into  hard  aspect  to  Neptune,  dis- 
illusionment with  the  marriage  often  takes  place,  and  the  person 
feels  he  or  she  cannot  stay.  If  a  personal  planet  makes  a  harsh  as- 
pect to  Pluto,  the  power  struggles  become  too  intense  to  endure. 
If  divorce  is  not  promised  natally,  your  client  will  most  likely 
work  through  these  difficult  aspects.  People  with  fixed  angles,  es- 
pecially Taurus/ Scorpio  on  the  first  and  seventh  houses,  find  it  al- 
most impossible  to  leave  a  marriage.  It  is  a  'til-death-do-us-part  ex- 
perience for  them. 
I  had  a  client  who  had  fixed  angles.  Along  with  this,  her  natal 
chart  had  Venus  sextile  Mars  (the  natural  rulers  of  the  first  and 
seventh  houses),  the  Sun  trine  Moon,  and  the  rulers  of  the  first 
and  seventh  houses  in  harmony.  Even  though  she  was  having 
some  very  difficult  transits  and  progressions  that  were  causing  her 
to  think  seriously  about  divorce,  I  thought  it  was  very  unlikely 
that  she  would  get  divorced,  because  divorce  is  not  promised  in 
her  chart.  Her  chart  is  all  about  being  positive,  constructive,  and 
making  her  marriage  work,  and  that  is  what  she  did. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  a  client  has  an  afflicted  Uranus  or  disrup- 
tive relationship  aspects,  and  he  or  she  experiences  the  exact  same 
transits  and  progressions,  divorce  will  follow.  Again,  it  goes  back 
to  the  natal  promise. 
Elizabeth  Taylor's  chart  is  a  good  example  of  someone  with 
the  natal  promise  for  divorce.  She  has  Venus  conjunct  Uranus  in 
the  seventh  house.  She  has  been  divorced  seven  times  and  wid- 
owed once.  Every  time  this  conjunction  is  heavily  triggered,  she 
gets  a  divorce.  She  doesn't  need  much  activation  to  break  out, 
break  free,  and  do  her  own  thing.  Elizabeth's  chart  is  a  classic  di- 
vorce chart.  She  has  cardinal  signs  (Libra  and  Aries)  on  the  cusps 
of  her  first  and  seventh  houses,  so  she  rushes  into  marriage  and 
gets  bored  easily.  She  also  has  a  lot  of  applying  aspects  to  her  Sun, 
so  she  intuitively  knows  there  will  always  be  another  man.  With 
her  Sun  opposed  Neptune,  she  doesn  t  have  the  best  judgment 

<<<PAGE 64>>>
50    /    The  Natal  Promise 
when  it  comes  to  men,  but  this  aspect  does  indicate  tremendous 
charisma  and  magnetism.  She  can  attract  men  and  she  knows  it. 
In  general,  it  has  been  my  observation  that  cardinal  (Aries,  Can- 
cer, Libra,  and  Capricorn)  people  divorce  very  quickly  and  don't 
look  back. 
We Ve  talked  a  lot  about  Uranus  being  disruptive  in  marriage, 
but  I  do  have  a  client  who  has  Uranus  in  the  seventh  house  who 
has  a  very  successful  marriage.  It  is  a  relationship  that  is  very  in- 
dependent, unique,  and  different.  She  and  her  husband  lead  very 
separate  lives.  So  it  is  very  possible  to  have  Uranus  in  the  seventh 
house  and  have  a  successful  marriage.  She  found  a  man  who  was 
happy  to  let  her  do  her  own  thing.  They  both  travel  in  different  di- 
rections for  their  jobs,  and  even  though  they  lead  very  indepen- 
dent lives,  when  they  do  come  together  they  complement  each 
other  well. 
Venus  square  Pluto  can  promise  divorce.  It's  not  always  a  di- 
vorce aspect,  but  it  does  create  very  intense  responses  to  relation- 
ships. If  it  is  a  Pluto-influenced  divorce,  when  the  marriage  is  over 
it  is  really  over.  It's  so  dead  there's  no  way  to  ever  breathe  any  life 
into  it  again,  even  as  friends. 
The  Sun  square  Moon  is  another  aspect  that  can  indicate  di- 
vorce. The  masculine  and  feminine  principles  within  the  person 
are  in  disharmony.  Many  times  the  client  did  not  see  a  positive 
role  model  for  marriage  in  his  or  her  parents'  relationship.  Again, 
this  is  not  an  aspect  that's  about  divorce  per  se.  It's  more  about  an 
inner  struggle  that  can  spill  over  into  personal  relationships.  I  have 
seen  people  with  the  Sun  square  Moon  who  never  divorce,  but 
they  must  come  to  terms  with  themselves  and  the  way  they  ex- 
press themselves  with  others. 
Venus  square  Mars  is  yet  another  potential  divorce  aspect. 
Venus  and  Mars  are  the  natural  rulers  of  the  first  and  seventh 
houses,  which  are  all  about  getting  along.  When  they  are  square, 
there  is  a  challenge.  Many  times  it  indicates  an  unhappy  marriage, 
or  needs  not  being  met,  or  strife.  People  with  this  placement  tend 
to  choose  partners  who  meet  either  their  emotional  needs  or  their 
sexual  needs,  but  not  both.  Their  need  for  love  may  be  out  of  sync 

<<<PAGE 65>>>
The  Natal  Promise   /  51 
with  their  sexual  desires  or  their  outward  actions  may  be  just  the 
opposite  of  their  inner  needs,  so  a  person  with  this  placement 
might  act  distant  or  aloof,  yet  really  want  intimacy 
Most  often  the  key  planet  for  divorce  is  Uranus.  Uranus  has  to 
make  a  strong  statement  both  natally  and  by  progression  in  the 
client  s  chart.  If  it  does  not,  the  prospect  for  divorce  is  not  as  likely. 
Other  Factors  in  Divorce 
Many  times  people  think  about  getting  a  divorce  when  they  are 
ready  to  begin  a  new  cycle.  That  can  be  when  the  progressed  Sun 
or  Venus  is  at  28°  or  29°  and  is  getting  ready  to  enter  a  new  sign. 
The  person  is  ready  to  make  a  big  change  in  life,  which  can  affect 
all  close  personal  relationships. 
When  there  is  a  heavy  planet  (Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  Nep- 
tune, or  Pluto)  transiting  the  first  or  seventh  house,  the  person 
and  the  marriage  do  not  remain  the  same.  The  person  and  the 
partnership  will  go  through  monumental  changes. 
When  people  have  the  nodes  in  the  first  and  seventh  houses, 
they're  supposed  to  work  on  marriage  and  relationship  issues,  par- 
ticularly if  it  is  the  North  Node  in  the  seventh.  The  South  Node  is 
what  a  person  is  comfortable  with  and  the  North  Node  is  what  a 
person  is  in  the  process  of  defining.  Those  with  the  South  Node  in 
the  seventh  know  how  to  "do''  relationships.  Those  with  the  North 
Node  in  the  seventh  know  how  to  be  alone,  but  don't  have  the  abil- 
ity to  be  a  partner.  They  can  have  a  very  difficult  time  in  relation- 
ships early  in  life  because  they  don't  know  how  to  do  it.  They  have 
always  been  loners  in  past  lives.  Those  with  the  South  Node  in  the 
seventh  will  live  vicariously  through  their  partner  instead  of  work- 
ing on  their  own  identity.  It  is  important  for  clients  to  learn  to  bal- 
ance their  nodes. 
I've  seen  people  have  long-standing  relationships  with  partners 
whose  signs  on  the  first  and  seventh  axis  are  the  reverse  of  theirs. 
For  example,  a  person  with  Cancer  rising  and  Capricorn  on  the 
seventh  would  be  very  tied  to  a  person  with  Capricorn  rising  and 
Cancer  on  the  seventh-house  cusp.  These  two  signs  are  an  astro- 
logical pair.  Together,  they  form  a  complete  unit,  a  whole.  Their 

<<<PAGE 66>>>
52    /    The  Natal  Promise 
charts  are  in  sync,  as  is  their  approach  to  life.  It's  very  hard  to  break 
this  type  of  tie.  It  is  a  very  strong  link  between  the  two  people.  If 
fixed  signs  are  involved,  the  couple  rarely  break  the  bond. 
Many  times  the  degrees  will  indicate  exact  time  frames.  It  can 
be  very  literal  and  accurate.  For  example,  natally  I  have  Pluto  in 
the  seventh  house  at  24°  Cancer  square  Uranus.  Guess  how  long  I 
was  married  the  first  time?  Twenty-four  years.  Degrees  can  indi- 
cate age,  too,  but  more  commonly,  they  indicate  time.  I  have  a 
client  for  whom  the  degrees  indicated  age.  Twenty- two  degrees  of 
Aries  is  on  her  seventh-house  cusp,  and  that  was  her  age  when  she 
got  married  the  first  time.  When  she  turned  fifty-two,  she  mar- 
ried for  the  second  time.  This  is  something  I  make  note  of  I  have 
also  seen  this  type  of  thing  present  with  divorce. 
Uranus  squaring  Pluto  in  my  seventh  house  is  clearly  my  di- 
vorce aspect.  It's  interesting,  though,  because  I  went  to  several  as- 
trologers, and  I  can  remember  them  saying,  "You'll  never  get  di- 
vorced." Part  of  me  wanted  to  get  divorced.  That's  what  I  wanted 
to  hear.  But  my  chart  indicated  that  it  just  wasn't  something  that 
would  happen  easily,  lightly,  or  without  a  lot  of  aggravation,  be- 
cause it  involved  Pluto. 
I  had  one  client  who  consulted  me  for  years.  He  had  Uranus 
conjunct  his  Ascendant,  and  every  time  a  progressed  planet  as- 
pected  his  natal  Uranus,  he  responded  to  that  energy  by  getting 
divorced.  He  came  to  me  with  his  first  divorce  when  progressed 
Venus  squared  natal  Uranus.  He  got  married  again.  Then  pro- 
gressed Mars  moved  up  and  squared  Uranus,  and  he  divorced 
again.  Then  his  progressed  Sun  moved  up  and  squared  Uranus.  Re- 
cently I  heard  from  him  and  he's  getting  divorced  for  a  third  time. 
In  his  chart,  Venus,  Mars,  or  the  Sun  to  Uranus  triggered  divorce. 
Any  one  of  these  is  a  classic  divorce  aspect. 
Children 
The  number  of  children  promised  in  the  chart  is  not  necessarily 
the  number  you  will  elect  to  have.  With  the  invention  of  birth 
control,  couples  are  not  having  all  the  children  promised  in  either 

<<<PAGE 67>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  53 
the  woman's  or  the  man's  chart.  I  have  five  applying  aspects  to  the 
ruler  of  my  fifth  house,  and  I  had  five  children.  I  see  people  with 
the  same  setup  who  won  t  have  a  lot  of  children.  The  couple  will 
decide  not  to  have  a  large  family.  However,  they  can  usually  get 
pregnant  whenever  they  want  to.  They  are  fertile,  but  they  are 
using  birth  control.  I  didn't  use  birth  control,  so  I  manifested  all 
that  energy.  The  number  of  applying  aspects  to  the  fifth-house 
ruler  is  the  potential  number  of  children  you  can  have.  It  works 
the  same  way  as  the  applying  aspects  to  the  Sun  or  Moon.  Re- 
member that  the  number  of  applying  aspects  to  the  luminary  in- 
dicates the  number  of  potential  marriages,  but  is  not  necessarily 
the  number  of  marriages  the  person  will  elect  to  have. 
Here's  how  the  ruler  of  my  fifth  house  promises  five  children: 
I  have  Gemini  on  the  fifth  house,  and  Mercury,  my  fifth-house 
ruler,  is  at  1°  Virgo.  Before  it  leaves  the  sign,  it  applies  in  sextile  as- 
pect to  my  Mars  in  Scorpio.  It  makes  a  conjunction  to  my  Virgo 
Sun  and  a  conjunction  to  Neptune  in  Virgo.  It  then  applies  in  sex- 
tile  aspect  to  Pluto  in  Cancer,  and  the  last  applying  aspect  it  makes 
is  a  conjunction  to  Jupiter  in  Virgo.  The  aspects  Mercury  makes 
actually  describe  all  of  my  children — the  planets  involved  in  these 
aspects,  the  signs  they  are  in,  and  the  signs  they  naturally  rule. 
Let's  look  at  how  this  works: 
•  My  oldest  child  has  her  Cancer  Sun  conjunct  Jupiter,  with 
her  Moon  in  Pisces,  and  Gemini  rising.  Her  Ascendant  is  at 
the  same  degree  of  Gemini  as  my  fifth-house  cusp.  The  fifth 
house  always  represents  your  first  child. 
•  My  second  child  is  a  Virgo  with  his  Moon  in  Sagittarius  and 
Sagittarius  rising.  His  father  has  Pisces  rising  with  Virgo  on 
the  seventh-house  cusp,  and  my  son's  Sun  falls  in  his  father's 
seventh  house.  They  are  business  partners.  Often  a  woman's 
second  child  is  more  like  her  husband  (the  seventh  house  rep- 
resents both  the  first  husband  and  the  second  child). 
•  My  third  child  is  an  Aries  with  the  Moon  in  Sagittarius  and 
Virgo  rising.  I  have  Mars  in  my  ninth  house,  and  that  house 
represents  the  third  child. 

<<<PAGE 68>>>
54    /    The  Natal  Promise 
•  My  fourth  child  is  a  Virgo  with  her  Moon  in  Cancer  and  Libra 
rising.  The  ruler  of  her  Sun,  Mercury,  is  at  27°  Virgo.  This  is 
so  interesting  because  the  ruler  of  my  eleventh  house  is 
Jupiter  at  27°  Virgo.  The  eleventh  house  designates  the  fourth 
child.  I  find  this  to  be  an  amazing  connection. 
•  My  fifth  child  is  a  Sagittarius  with  the  Moon  in  Gemini  and 
Capricorn  rising.  Often  the  fifth  child  can  be  more  like  you 
because  this  child  is  represented  by  your  first  house,  or  As- 
cendant. We  both  have  Capricorn  rising  and  are  very  much 
alike. 
If  you  have  planets  in  the  fifth  house,  they  will  describe  your  chil- 
dren in  the  same  w^ay  the  aspects  to  my  Mercury  describe  mine.  A 
lot  of  times  people  will  have  two  planets  in  the  fifth  house  and 
will  have  rvv^o  children.  Each  planet  will  describe  one  of  the  chil- 
dren. I  have  seen  people  with  their  Sun  in  the  fifth  have  a  Leo 
child.  Many  times  that  child  will  be  the  central  focus  of  their  lives. 
That  child  could  be  also  be  famous,  remarkable,  or  stand  out  in 
some  way.  For  instance,  I  have  a  friend  whose  Sun  is  in  the  fifth 
and  her  child  went  to  West  Point  and  will  probably  have  an  excep- 
tional military  career.  I  have  seen  people  with  Gemini  on  the  fifth- 
house  cusp  or  Gemini  prominent  who  have  had  twins.  Again, 
sometimes  astrology  is  so  literal  and  so  easy  that  it  stuns  me. 
Other  times,  it's  hard  and  frustrating. 
I  have  several  friends  who  have  ten  and  twelve  children.  That's 
when  the  rules  for  determining  the  number  of  children  are  bro- 
ken. There's  no  way  you  can  have  ten  or  twelve  applying  aspects 
to  the  ruler  of  the  fifth  house,  but  what  I  have  observed  with 
many  of  these  women  is  that  Jupiter  is  in  their  fifth  house  or 
strongly  connected  to  the  ruler  of  the  fifth.  In  my  generation 
there  were  a  lot  of  people  who  had  large  families,  and  they  ex- 
pressed every  applying  aspect  to  the  ruler  of  their  fifth,  or  they  let 
their  fifth-house  Jupiter  fully  manifest  itself  Today  people  are 
making  different  choices  and  decisions.  While  they  might  have 
those  aspects,  they're  exercising  free  will  and  choosing  to  limit 
their  families. 

<<<PAGE 69>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  55 
If  it's  a  client's  first  marriage,  I  look  to  the  eleventh  house  for 
adopted  children  or  stepchildren.  The  eleventh  house  will  de- 
scribe the  client's  relationship  with  those  children,  and  it  will  also 
describe  the  first  of  these  children.  Count  around  the  wheel  to 
every  other  house  for  each  successive  child.  The  second  adopted 
child  or  stepchild  will  be  defined  by  the  first  house,  the  third  by 
the  third  house,  and  so  forth. 
For  grandchildren,  I  look  to  the  ninth  house.  Because  it  is  five 
houses  from  my  fifth  house  of  children,  it  will  describe  my  chil- 
dren's children.  I  have  Libra  on  my  ninth-house  cusp  and  Mars  in 
Scorpio  in  the  ninth.  I  have  nine  grandchildren  and  aU  are  attractive, 
athletic,  and  energetic.  Each  one  of  them  has  Libra,  Scorpio,  or 
Aries  prominent.  The  sign  on  my  ninth-house  cusp  and  the  planet 
in  it  (Mars)  describe  all  of  them.  Further,  the  ninth  house  specifi- 
cally describes  my  first  grandchild.  I  then  go  around  the  wheel  to 
every  other  house  to  describe  each  grandchild  in  turn.  So  the  sec- 
ond grandchild  will  be  described  by  my  eleventh  house,  and  so 
forth. 
Wealth /Money 
Many  clients  ask  about  money.  They  want  to  know  if  they  will  in- 
herit money  or  if  they  will  make  money.  Income  and  inheritances 
are  shown  by  the  second  and  eighth  houses,  respectively.  Uranus, 
Neptune,  or  Pluto  in  positive  aspect  to  Venus  and/  or  Jupiter  can 
bring  wealth.  Uranus  to  Jupiter  or  Venus  can  be  some  sudden,  un- 
expected windfall.  I  have  seen  lottery  winners  with  a  combination 
of  these  aspects.  Neptune  is  more  cumulative.  If  a  client  has  good 
Neptune /Jupiter  connections,  he  or  she  seems  to  be  able  to  mani- 
fest money.  The  client  knows  he  or  she  is  going  to  be  rich,  so  it 
happens.  Faith  and  beliefs  seem  to  materialize  wealth.  As  the  nat- 
ural ruler  of  the  eighth  house,  Pluto  can  bring  inherited  wealth.  It 
can  indicate  great  wealth.  You'll  see  many  multimillionaire  charts 
with  Pluto /Jupiter  or  Pluto /Venus  connections,  and  many  times 
their  money  is  inherited.  I  have  a  client  who  has  a  strong  Pluto  / 
Jupiter  connection,  and  her  fortune  came  to  her  in  a  fascinating 

<<<PAGE 70>>>
56    /    The  Natal  Promise 
way.  She  worked  for  a  start-up  company  and  her  employer  couldn't 
pay  her,  so  he  kept  giving  her  stock  in  the  firm.  The  business  grew 
very  quickly  and  the  stock  ended  up  being  worth  hundreds  of  mil- 
lions of  dollars.  It  wasn't  exactly  an  inheritance,  and  it  wasn't  a  typ- 
ical way  of  creating  wealth,  but  it  was  certainly  a  bonanza.  At  one 
point,  she  was  the  highest-paid  woman  executive  in  the  United 
States. 
I  believe  Jupiter  trine  Saturn  and  even  Jupiter  square  Saturn 
can  bring  wealth.  Many  times  if  these  planets  are  in  Cancer  or 
Capricorn,  wealth  can  come  through  property  or  real  estate.  A 
client  of  mine  has  his  Sun  and  Venus  in  the  second  house  squaring 
Saturn.  He  has  an  enormous  capacity  for  hard  work  and  is  very 
disciplined.  His  Sun  and  Venus  are  also  trine  Jupiter,  and  he  is 
often  in  the  right  place  at  the  right  time.  He  has  both  a  positive 
and  a  negative  aspect,  a  trine  and  a  square.  The  square  is  hard 
work,  tension,  and  drive.  The  trine  is  luck  and  the  ability  to  seize 
the  right  opportunity  at  the  right  moment.  He  made  his  money  in 
real  estate,  through  a  lucky  partnership,  because  Jupiter  is  trining 
the  Sun  and  Venus  from  the  seventh  house.  The  hard  work  in- 
volved was  described  by  the  Saturn  square. 
If  an  astrologer  sees  the  Sun  in  the  second  house  and  making 
several  aspects  in  a  client's  chart,  that  person  must  make  money. 
These  clients  will  not  find  satisfaction  or  individuality  until  they 
create  wealth.  With  the  Sun  in  the  second  house,  they  are  more 
likely  to  do  it  themselves.  Planets  in  the  second  house  indicate  ac- 
tivity around  earning  money  and  spending  it.  The  Sun  in  the  sec- 
ond house  appears  in  many  millionaires'  charts.  These  are  people 
who  work  hard  to  make  it,  and  I've  seen  success  with  both  good 
and  difficult  aspects  to  the  Sun. 
An  unaspected  Sun  in  the  second  house  means  the  client  is 
more  limited  in  ability  to  make  money  than  if  he  or  she  has  many 
aspects.  A  transit  or  progression  to  the  Sun  would  be  needed  to 
bring  out  some  of  the  planet's  ability  to  make  money.  A  chart  is  a 
stagnant  thing.  It  shows  promise,  but  it  needs  something  to  excite 
it,  stimulate  it,  bring  it  alive,  and  set  the  stage.  The  transits  excite 
it  and  stimulate  it.  The  progressions  set  the  stage.  The  chart  itself 

<<<PAGE 71>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  57 
is  quiet  without  them.  As  the  planets  move  through  the  heavens, 
an  unaspected  Sun  is  going  to  be  lit  up  some  of  the  time,  even 
though  it  has  no  natal  aspects  to  it.  A  person  v^ith  any  unaspected 
planet  doesn  t  have  access  to  the  energy  of  that  planet  as  often  as 
if  it  were  an  aspected  planet.  Think  of  it  this  way:  Every  time  a 
planet  is  triggered,  all  the  other  planets  in  aspect  to  it  are  trig- 
gered, too.  A  series  of  events  occurs.  It's  the  aspects  that  trigger 
the  energies  of  the  planets. 
Another  good  stimulus  for  making  money  is  having  the  Sun  in 
one  of  the  angular  houses.  An  angular  Sun  must  express  itself 
publicly  and  there  will  be  the  push  to  "make  it."  The  Sun  in  the 
first  house  can  enable  the  individual  to  personally  create  wealth. 
This  is  someone  who  has  a  strong  personality.  If  this  person  con- 
centrates on  making  money,  he  or  she  will  be  successful.  If  the  Sun 
is  in  the  fourth  house,  destiny  and  family  will  help  propel  the  per- 
son to  succeed.  He  or  she  may  inherit  a  family  business,  property, 
or  wealth.  When  the  Sun  is  in  the  seventh,  success  comes  through 
partnerships,  relationships,  and  patronage.  Someone  with  the  Sun 
in  the  tenth  house  will  attract  a  lot  of  career  opportunities.  This  is 
an  individual  who  has  a  lot  of  ambition  and  a  need  for  power  and 
status.  Career  is  everything  to  this  person. 
The  eighth  house  is  also  important  for  wealth.  This  house  rep- 
resents joint  finances,  shared  resources,  taxes,  insurance,  business 
mergers,  a  partner  s  money,  other  people's  money,  invested  money, 
and  inherited  money.  People  with  this  placement  can  accumulate 
wealth  through  investments.  They  can  also  marry  wealth  or  in- 
herit it.  If  a  woman  has  her  Sun  in  the  eighth  house,  money  could 
come  through  her  husband  or  business  partner.  Her  chart  can 
help  her  husband  make  money,  but  it  can  come  through  other 
things,  too.  A  person  with  a  weak  fifth  house  (house  of  specula- 
tion) but  a  strong  eighth  house  should  not  make  investments 
without  advice.  I  have  a  client  who  has  an  afflicted  fifth-house 
ruler,  but  a  very  good  eighth  house.  She  cannot  speculate  with 
money  herself  If  she  picks  a  stock,  it  usually  doesn't  do  well  even 
if  all  the  forecasts  are  promising.  However,  if  she  uses  her  eighth 

<<<PAGE 72>>>
58    /    The  Natal  Promise 
house  by  getting  an  investment  counselor  to  handle  her  money, 
she  does  very  well  in  the  marketplace. 
When  I'm  doing  a  chart  and  I  see  planets  at  27°,  28°,  and  29°,  I 
make  note  because  this  person  has  the  potential  to  achieve  some- 
thing special.  I  have  had  many  clients  who  have  planets  at  these 
degrees  who  are  very  rich.  I  have  a  lot  of  millionaire  clients  who 
have  enormous  real-estate  holdings  with  their  Sun  at  29°  Cancer. 
One  year  I  had  two  students  in  one  of  my  classes  who  both  had 
their  Sun  at  29°  Cancer  (family)  who  were  blessed  with  inherited 
wealth.  One  had  a  family  farm,  and  the  land  was  developed  into  a 
commercial  project  that  catapulted  her  into  the  millionaire  cate- 
gory. The  other  student  inherited  family  real  estate  and  the  family 
business.  I  have  another  client  who  is  a  multimillionaire  with  Sat- 
urn at  29°  Capricorn  (Capricorn  needs  to  build  and  rules  con- 
struction). He  started  with  a  small  construction  company  that 
grew  to  be  a  large  international  business. 
I  have  seen  millionaires  with  planets  at  27°,  28°,  and  29°  in  all  of 
the  signs,  but  most  often  they  are  in  earth  or  water  signs.  I  have 
seen  29°  Taurus  or  Scorpio  also  indicate  bankruptcy.  These  two 
signs  can  go  to  either  extreme,  great  wealth  or  financial  disaster. 
Bette  Davis  is  an  interesting  example  of  this.  She  has  Venus  and 
Mars  at  28°  and  29°  Taurus.  After  many  successful  years  in  the 
movie  business,  she  experienced  great  financial  losses  and  could  not 
get  an  acting  job.  She  had  to  put  an  ad  in  the  trades  seeking  work. 
Planets  at  28°  or  29°  Leo  are  conjunct  the  royal  fixed  star  Reg- 
ulus.  This  placement  can  bestow  prominence  and  a  love  of  power 
and  success,  among  other  things.  I  have  noticed  that  with  clients 
who  have  planets  here  are  not  necessarily  wealthy,  but  they  do 
travel  in  very  influential  circles.  However,  America's  "queen," 
Jackie  Onassis,  had  Regulus  conjunct  her  Midheaven  at  29°  Leo, 
and  not  only  did  she  travel  in  the  most  important  circles,  but  she 
was  very  rich. 
Bill  Gates,  who  has  made  his  fortune  with  computers,  has 
Pluto  at  28°  Leo,  which  is  the  ruler  of  his  Sun  in  Scorpio.  Writer 
Scott  Turow  has  three  planets  at  late  degrees,  Saturn  at  29°  Leo, 
Jupiter  at  29°  Capricorn,  and  Uranus  at  27°  Gemini. 

<<<PAGE 73>>>
The  Natal  Promise   /  59 
I  have  a  client  who  has  Neptune  conjunct  Regulus  at  28°  Leo  in 
his  ninth  house  of  higher  learning.  He  attended  Princeton  and 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  two  of  the  best  universi- 
ties in  the  United  States. 
There  are  some  people  who  are  very,  very  lucky.  Those  with  a 
Venus /Jupiter  aspect,  any  Venus /Jupiter  aspect,  fall  into  this  cat- 
egory They  usually  marry  money,  inherit  it,  create  it,  or  win  it. 
This  is  the  potential  in  their  chart,  but  there  can  be  overindulgence, 
overoptimism,  and  extravagance.  When  these  two  benefics  are  in 
aspect  to  one  another,  there  is  enormous  ease,  but  without  rein- 
forcing aspects,  the  person  can  lack  drive  and  push.  ^ 
Many  people  who  come  to  me  want  to  know  if  they  are  going 
to  win  the  lottery.  Tm  always  amazed  when  people  ask  this  ques- 
tion because  I  don  t  think  winning  the  lottery  is  such  a  gift  from 
God.  I  have  had  a  few  clients  who  have  won,  and  in  some  cases  it 
meant  trouble. 
Once  you  win  the  lottery,  all  sorts  of  problems  crop  up.  After 
winning,  you  can't  please  the  people  close  to  you.  Relatives  get 
upset  if  you  don't  share  your  good  fortune.  (Why  they  think  they 
are  entitled  to  it  is  a  mystery  to  me.)  If  you  give  them  money,  it's 
not  enough.  It  never  ends.  I  thing  it  can  be  a  real  curse.  But  if  it's 
not  promised  in  the  natal  chart,  it's  never  going  to  happen.  You  are 
not  going  to  win  at  all.  I  looked  at  my  chart.  There  is  no  way  I'm 
ever  going  to  win  because  I  don't  have  an  aspect  that  promises  that 
kind  of  luck.  I  can  win  at  games  of  skill,  because  my  Mercury 
makes  some  good  aspects  (such  as  Mercury  conjunct  the  South 
Node),  but  I  will  never  win  at  games  of  luck.  For  me,  putting  quar- 
ters in  slot  machines  is  like  throwing  them  into  the  street.  It's  just 
never  going  to  bring  me  anything.  I'm  very  happy  to  play  at  games 
of  chance  for  entertainment  and  fun,  but  I  know  I  will  never  be  a 
big  winner. 
Success 
Jupiter  and  Sagittarius  create  luck.  Success  is  different  from  luck. 
We  think  of  luck  as  an  unexpected,  unearned  gift  from  the  powers 

<<<PAGE 74>>>
60    /    The  Natal  Promise 
that  be.  We  think  of  success  as  the  result  of  hard  work  or  as  some- 
thing we  plan  and  work  toward.  There  are  several  factors  in  a 
chart  that  can  promise  success.  Having  the  nodes  in  angular 
houses  (1,  4,  7,  and  10)  seems  to  bode  well  for  success.  I  have 
found  that  having  either  the  North  or  the  South  Node  in  the  tenth 
house  is  equally  favorable  for  success.  Having  the  nodes  in  the 
first  and  seventh  houses  seems  to  be  good,  too.  The  seventh  house 
talks  about  patronage,  and  when  a  node  is  there,  it  can  promise 
lots  of  clients  or  business  for  that  person.  For  example,  a  therapist 
who  is  self-employed  is  dependent  on  having  many  patients  and 
referrals.  Having  either  node  in  the  seventh  house  can  promise 
good  patronage. 
When  the  nodes,  which  are  destiny  points,  are  in  angular 
houses,  success  is  meant  to  be.  If  a  client  has  the  North  Node  in 
the  tenth,  it  is  his  or  her  destiny  to  have  a  great  career.  Many  times 
my  clients  have  had  great  careers  in  spite  of  themselves.  It's  the 
most  fascinating  thing  to  watch.  They  always  seem  to  be  in  the 
right  place  at  the  right  time  and  career  success  seems  to  unfold 
without  much  effort. 
The  North  Node  does  read  somewhat  like  Jupiter,  and  the 
South  Node  reads  somewhat  like  Saturn.  Both  are  equally  good 
for  success,  achievement,  and  making  it.  While  the  North  Node's 
influence,  like  Jupiter's,  is  more  apparent,  and  the  South  Node, 
like  Saturn,  can  delay,  I  don  t  see  either  one  limiting  success.  What 
I  have  found  with  clients  who  have  the  North  Node  in  the  tenth 
and  the  South  Node  in  the  fourth  is  that  they  may  not  necessarily 
have  the  drive  or  want  to  have  their  own  career  that  much.  In  past 
lives  they  have  been  the  person  behind  the  scenes,  the  person  at 
home.  They  know  how  to  build  a  home  and  family,  but  building  a 
career  isn't  that  comfortable  for  them.  However,  if  they  get  out 
there  at  all,  things  will  click  into  place  for  them  very  easily  be- 
cause it's  their  destiny  to  have  a  prosperous  career.  Of  course,  I 
am  talking  about  unafflicted,  well-aspected  nodes. 
I  have  a  great  story  about  a  client  who  has  the  North  Node  in 
the  tenth  and  the  South  Node  in  the  fourth.  He  married  a  woman 
who  already  had  a  big  career.  His  wife  traveled  a  great  deal,  and 

<<<PAGE 75>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  61 
he  was  content  to  stay  at  home  and  do  a  lot  of  the  domestic 
things  like  watching  the  kids  and  taking  care  of  the  house.  He  was 
an  attorney,  but  didn  t  really  enjoy  the  law.  He  started  a  real-estate 
company  and  his  wife  backed  him.  With  Uranus  in  the  first  house 
and  his  Moon  in  Libra,  this  gentleman  has  enormous  charisma 
and  charm.  Before  long,  he  became  a  superstar,  a  multimillion- 
aire. He  became  very  successful. 
The  South  Node  indicates  what  a  person  knows  how  to  do, 
and  the  North  Node  indicates  what  he  or  she  must  learn.  The  key 
is  to  balance  them  both.  So  when  people  have  the  South  Node  in 
the  tenth  house,  they  instinctively  know  how  to  build  a  career.  In 
other  lifetimes  these  people  probably  made  career  a  priority  What 
they're  supposed  to  do  this  time  is  have  a  good  home  and  family 
life,  too.  That's  what  they  came  here  to  do,  but  they  don't  want  to 
be  home  all  the  time.  They  really  want  to  be  out  there  having  a 
career,  because  that's  what  they  are  comfortable  with.  During  this 
lifetime,  however,  it  is  their  destiny  to  build  a  home  and  family  life 
in  addition  to  having  a  flourishing  career. 
When  threatened,  people  retreat  into  their  South  Node.  When 
they  feel  they  can't  cope  with  a  stressful  situation,  they  retreat  into 
behavior  that  is  familiar  and  natural.  A  priest  was  my  client  for 
years.  He  had  the  North  Node  in  the  tenth  and  the  South  Node  in 
the  fourth.  Doors  opened  easily  for  him,  he  did  very  positive 
things,  and  was  really  moving  up  through  the  ranks  of  the  church 
hierarchy 
Then  there  was  a  scandal  at  his  church  that  didn't  touch  him, 
but  he  was  really  disgusted  and  upset  by  it.  When  he  came  for  a 
consultation,  I  said,  "I  know  what  you  did,  you  ran  home  to  hide, 
didn't  you?"  And  he  said,  "Yes,  I  did."  He  just  left  everything  and 
went  back  to  his  hometown  and  stayed  there  for  a  couple  of 
months.  When  his  career  (North  Node  in  the  tenth)  was  threat- 
ened, he  ran  to  his  home  (South  Node  in  the  fourth),  where  he 
was  safe  and  comfortable.  I  said,  "You  know,  you  can  only  stay 
there  for  a  little  while.  You  will  have  to  go  back  to  your  career  be- 
cause you're  going  to  end  up  being  a  bishop  or  something  like  that 
in  spite  of  yourself"  He  went  back.  I  don't  know  if  he's  a  bishop. 

<<<PAGE 76>>>
62    /    The  Natal  Promise 
but  the  last  I  heard,  he  was  very  succe'ssful  in  the  church.  Clearly  it 
was  his  fortune  to  have  a  distinguished  career  in  the  priesthood. 
Jupiter  in  the  tenth  house  is  certainly  fortunate  for  success,  as 
is  Sagittarius  on  the  tenth-house  cusp.  I  also  see  a  lot  of  people 
with  squares  out  of  the  tenth  house  doing  really  good  things,  be- 
cause that's  where  they  have  the  tension  and  the  energy.  (What  I 
mean  by  squares  out  of  the  tenth  is  that  the  planets  placed  in  the 
tenth  are  making  squares.)  There  can  be  blockage  and  delays,  but 
hard  work  pays  off.  A  well-aspected  Sun,  Jupiter,  North  Node,  or 
South  Node  in  the  tenth  can  make  career  success  flow  much  more 
easily. 
Case  Study:  Ron  Howard 
Ron  Howard  has  both  his  North  Node  and  Moon  in  the  tenth 
house  in  Capricorn.  His  Moon  is  in  a  T-Square  out  of  the  tenth 
house,  opposing  Uranus  and  squaring  Neptune.  This  cardinal  T- 
Square  gives  him  drive  and  ambition.  Uranus  is  also  in  a  Grand 
Water  Trine,  which  gives  him  great  creative  genius.  The  orbs  be- 
tween the  planets  of  this  Grand  Water  Trine  are  very  wide,  but  I 
find  this  works  to  the  person  s  advantage.  Many  times  I  have 
found  that  when  planets  in  a  Grand  Water  Trine  are  in  very  tight 
orb,  the  person  has  enormous  creativity  yet  seems  too  emotion- 
ally self-sufficient. 
Pluto  in  the  tenth  house  or  ruling  the  tenth  bodes  well  for  ca- 
reer success.  That  is  because  there  is  such  a  deep  psychological 
need  for  recognition  that  the  person  will  do  whatever  is  needed.  A 
stellium  in  the  tenth  gives  you  a  lot  of  energy  to  work  on  your  ca- 
reer. When  clients  have  many  planets  up  in  the  tenth,  there's  a  lot 
of  activity  in  that  area  of  their  lives.  It  is  what  is  important  to 
them.  But  having  a  chart  with  nothing  in  the  tenth  doesn  t  mean 
the  person  won  t  have  a  big  career.  The  ruler  of  the  tenth  house 
may  be  very  active  and  give  them  many  outlets  for  expressing  ca- 
reer goals. 

<<<PAGE 77>>>
The  Natal  Promise   /  63 
Ron  Howard 
March  1,  1954  /  9:30  a.m.  CST 
Del  City,  OK 

<<<PAGE 78>>>
64    /    The  Natal  Promise 
One  of  the  aspects  I  constantly  see  for  success  is  the  Moon  in 
harmonious  aspect  to  Venus,  which  indicates  public  love  and  ac- 
ceptance. I  have  noticed  this  to  be  a  consistent  aspect  for  famous 
people  because  it  bodes  well  for  public  approval.  I  have  also  found 
the  Moon  trine  Jupiter  to  work  in  a  similar  way. 
Violence/Rape 
Some  clients  worry  about  violence  or  rape  in  their  lives.  There's 
not  going  to  be  that  kind  of  trauma  in  life  unless  it's  promised.  It's 
the  same  with  cancer  or  a  serious  illness.  Then,  the  natal  setup  has 
to  be  stimulated  for  the  violence  to  occur.  The  stage  is  first  set  by 
progressions,  then  triggered  by  a  transit,  lunation,  the  progressed 
Moon,  or  some  combination  of  these. 
One  of  my  students  was  raped.  She  had  her  Moon /Mars/ 
Pluto  in  a  fixed  T-Square.  When  the  progressed  Moon  came 
around  and  conjuncted  her  natal  Moon,  the  T-Square  was  trig- 
gered and  that's  when  it  happened.  Obviously  there  were  other 
things  going  on  in  her  chart  to  back  up  this  experience.  After  years 
of  doing  charts,  I  have  found  that  if  someone  is  raped  or  in  any 
way  sexually  abused,  nine  times  out  of  ten  he  or  she  gains  weight 
and  become  very  hea\y  as  a  protection.  When  I  have  a  client 
come  to  me  who  is  very  heavy  I  try^  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  it. 
I  have  one  client  who  is  overv,^eight  and  I  know  she  wasn't 
abused  or  raped.  After  talking  with  her  it  turned  out  that  she  had 
had  a  very  bad  experience.  She  had  never  dated  much,  and  then 
she  went  out  with  some  friends  from  another  city.  She  ended  up 
in  bed  with  one  of  the  guys.  This  was  her  first  sexual  experience. 
Her  period  was  late  and  she  was  worried  that  she  was  pregnant. 
She  wasn't,  but  it  was  a  big  mess.  When  she  spoke  with  her  part- 
ner, he  was  neither  gallant  nor  nice.  I  think  that  encounter  set  her 
up  to  protect  herself  with  extra  weight. 
Natally  she  has  her  Moon  conjunct  Jupiter  in  Sagittarius. 
Jupiter /Sagittarius  can  expand,  and  the  Moon  is  food,  nurturing, 
and  the  stomach.  So  the  natal  promise  is  there  for  weight  gain, 

<<<PAGE 79>>>
The  Natal  Promise    /  65 
and  I  feel  what  was  happening  in  her  chart  at  the  time  to  cause  the 
trauma  also  triggered  the  setup  for  gaining  weight.  This  is  one  iso- 
lated incident — not  everyone  with  a  similar  setup  will  have  the 
same  results. 
Mars /Pluto  is  definitely  a  violent  aspect.  It  is  one  of  the  rape 
aspects,  either  Mars  conjunct,  square,  or  opposite  Pluto.  I  always 
worry  about  these  aspects  because  it  is  important  to  use  this  en- 
ergy properly,  otherwise  it  could  manifest  in  a  negative  way.  If  I 
see  it  in  a  child's  chart,  I  will  talk  to  the  parents.  I  don  t  want  to 
scare  them,  but  I  want  them  to  get  the  child  into  activities  where 
he  or  she  will  channel  the  energy  constructively.  I  have  seen 
young  people  with  this  energy  become  very  good  ballerinas,  gym- 
nasts, athletes,  and  debaters  (especially  if  Mercury  is  connected  in 
some  way). 
One  of  my  young  male  clients  with  a  Mars /Pluto  aspect  is 
such  a  fierce  athlete  that  I  know  he's  using  up  all  the  energy  in 
sports.  He's  only  sixteen  years  old  and  has  varsity  letters  in  three 
sports,  so  that's  where  the  energy  is  going  for  him.  I  also  have  a 
young  female  client  with  this  aspect  who  is  turning  out  to  be  quite 
the  dancer.  Another  young  client  had  this  aspect  and  when  the  as- 
pect closed,  she  got  into  sports.  (What  I  mean  by  "the  aspect 
closed"  is  that  by  progression  her  Mars  moved  forward  and 
squared  her  natal  Pluto  exactly.)  The  time  when  any  aspect  be- 
comes partile,  or  exact,  by  progression  is  when  I  expect  the  aspect 
to  manifest.  So  I  was  relieved  to  see  her  get  into  sports  and  be- 
come a  fierce  competitor,  and  not  have  an  unpleasant  incident. 
I  have  a  client  who  is  very  brilliant  and  has  several  doctoral  de- 
grees. She  has  her  Mars  square  Pluto  and  I  asked  her  about  it.  She 
said  that  she  was  terribly  emotionally  abused.  For  her,  the  aspect 
comes  out  of  the  third  house,  as  her  Pluto  is  in  the  third,  so  it  was 
expressed  as  mental  and  verbal  abuse  instead  of  physical  abuse. 
But  she  turned  things  around  and  used  that  aspect  scholastically  to 
get  several  advanced  degrees.  Natal  Pluto  in  the  third  house  can  in- 
dicate someone  who  cannot  get  enough  knowledge. 

<<<PAGE 80>>>
66    /    The  Natal  Promise 
The  other  thing  that  can  happen  with  a  Mars /Pluto  aspect  is 
abuse,  battery,  or  violence.  I  saw  a  client  who  had  her  Mars  oppo- 
site Pluto  from  the  first  to  the  seventh  house.  I  said  to  her,  "You 
know  you  have  to  be  very  discriminating  about  who  you  go  out 
with.  You  have  to  be  very  careful  when  you  date."  I  was  saying  all 
the  things  you  would  say  if  somebody  had  that  aspect.  And  she 
said,  "Well  it's  already  happened  to  me.  There  was  a  lot  of  violence 
in  my  home  growing  up  and  then  in  my  marriage."  She  continued, 
'As  a  result  of  that,  I  now  run  a  shelter  for  battered  women." 
I  was  impressed.  She's  using  the  Mars /Pluto  energy  in  a  very 
constructive  way.  It  reflects  the  opposition,  because  it  is  relation- 
ships and  choice.  She  chose  how  to  use  the  energy.  Up  until  that 
point,  she  was  placed  in  (as  a  child)  or  put  herself  in  (as  an  adult) 
difficult  situations.  She  had  a  troubled  childhood,  boyfriends  who 
beat  her  up,  and  then  chose  a  violent  husband. 
With  squares,  the  difficult  situations  just  come  and  they  do  not 
offer  choices,  like  oppositions.  So  a  client  with  a  strong  square  has 
to  be  very  careful  in  certain  situations  that  are  safe  for  other 
people,  like  going  to  a  bar.  Bad  energy  often  comes  without  being 
invited.  With  the  opposition,  it's  more  a  matter  of  making  bad 
choices. 
I  can't  tell  you  how  many  times  I've  said  to  a  client,  "You  have  an 
aspect  here  where  you  might  attract  danger.  I  think  it's  really  im- 
portant that  you  always  know  who  you  date.  Don't  pick  up  people 
in  bars.  Be  very  careful  who  you  associate  with  because  you  have 
this  potential  for  danger."  Too  many  times  they've  said  to  me, 
"You're  too  late.  It's  already  worked.  Somebody  crawled  in  my 
dorm  room  and  raped  me.  .  .  .  My  stepfather  raped  me.  ...  A  man 
followed  me  out  of  a  bar  and  beat  me  up  in  the  parking  lot,"  and  so 
on.  Astrologers  must  help  clients  sidestep  these  aspects. 
Vocation 
If  clients  aren't  coming  to  you  about  relationships  and  money,  they 
will  come  to  you  about  their  careers.  For  people  who  have  a  power- 
