# source: _OceanofPDF.com_The_Essentials_Of_Vedic_Astrology_-_Komilla_Sutton.pdf
# pages: 166-200
# compiled into: dashas.json, divisionals.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 166>>>
beginning of another. This is particularly so for those of us who have lagna or natal Moon in the
signs Jupiter rules, Sagittarius and Pisces. This transit can be a very positive experience. If you
draw up a chart for the exact time of the return it will give you clear indications of what the next
12-year Jupiter cycle will be about. The list of dates for Jupiter’s ingress into the signs is shown
on the next page.
The positive and negative energies of Jupiter and Saturn are meant to balance each other out in
the overall scheme of things. A good Jupiter transit can mitigate the effects of a rough Saturn
one.
Jupiter’s Ingress into the Signs - The Next Twelve Years
Transits of the Rahu Ketu axis
The real importance of these is that they bring eclipses, seen as opportunities for rebirth and
transformation. Unless an eclipse makes a major impact on your natal chart, the transits of Rahu
Ketu are not as important as those of Saturn and Jupiter. For an eclipse to have a major effect on
your life it must take place within 1-2º of your lagna, natal Sun or natal Moon or 1-2º of being
opposite them; then it will indicate a major change of direction in your life.

<<<PAGE 167>>>
Vargas - The Divisional Charts
The word varga means a part or division. Vargas are used in a specialised but essential area of
Vedic astrology which assesses a variety of charts arrived at by dividing the usual 30º per zodiac
sign by different numbers. There are sixteen varga charts in all, but most astrologers use
combinations of just six or seven. The rasi chart (natal chart) is also a varga chart: the 30º
divided by one. If your rasi chart represents your whole outer personality in all its complexity,
each varga chart represents one particular area of your life (house) writ large: it takes a theme
already present in the rashi chart and magnifies it for closer study. The varga charts are often
studied in groups so that recurrent themes can be followed through. A list of these is shown at
the end of the chapter.
As a student it is important to know about these charts as in time you will want to use them to
fine-tune interpretations and deepen your understanding. The real strength of the planets is
revealed in the way they are enhanced or reduced by their position in the varga charts. Most
Vedic astrologers in India will look at the shadvarga (6 divisional charts) or saptavarga (7
divisional charts) combination, but as beginners the most important varga to consider is the
navamsha chart - it is like the foundation of the rasi (natal) chart.
For varga charts to be correct, it is important to have the exact time of birth: some of the
vargas subdivide the 30º whole sign so minutely that a slight error in the time of birth can
completely throw out the calculations - like the shastiamsha chart which divides each sign into
60 parts. It will be different for births only seconds apart and is an important tool in
differentiating between twins who are born close together. The positions of the ascendant, Rahu
and Ketu, and the planets in the divisional charts are all calculated using their original positions
in the rasi chart as a starting point, but the resulting varga charts don’t show degrees - only signs.
Different rules apply for each varga; the calculation can become involved but it is included here
for information so you can see how the charts are produced. Tables are given at the end of the
chapter where required; all you need to do is transfer this information onto a new chart. The
varga charts are also a standard feature of most Vedic astrology software packages. Generally
transits are only applicable to the rasi chart.
The Varga Charts in More Detail
•    The rasi chart - the 30º zodiac sign divided by one

<<<PAGE 168>>>
This is the usual natal chart that uses your birth time to calculate the ascendant: the one that
contains your outer personality, past and future, and from which all the varga charts are derived -
both as regards calculations and interpretation. If the rasi chart does not suggest a character trait
or an event, any indications of such a thing in another divisional chart will have to be weighed
and assessed very carefully. The other varga charts can modify the rasi chart but they never
replace it. This is also the chart used to consider your physical health.
•    The hora chart - two divisions of 15º each
This simple division represents the male and female energies. Jyotish has always seen that a
combination of these exists in everyone and what this chart shows is exactly how the planets
work within the combination. The lists on the next page show you how to divide the planets into
male (Sun) and female (Moon) energies, which can then be drawn onto a chart in the signs of
Leo and Cancer respectively. To see which hora your planet or ascendant falls into check the
following list:
The hora chart has two main uses which focus on the issues indicated in the second house of the
rasi chart. It can provide further information on your overall personality - whether, in general,
you will be an active or a passive person, and how easy it will be for you to accumulate wealth.
People with a majority of planets placed in the Sun’s hora are active, very willing to take the
initiative. However, they will need to work to achieve results; any money they come by will have
been earned. If your lagna is in the Sun’s hora you will need to work doubly hard! People with a
majority of planets placed in the Moon’s hora will not have to work so hard to get results - they
may acquire wealth actually created by someone else. However, people with a strong female
hora will have rather a passive temperament, needing someone else’s energy to motivate them. If
the lagna is placed in the Moon’s hora, this indicates wealth will come to you without much
effort.
The hora chart also shows how the male and female energies manifest. A masculine planet in
Cancer causes inner tension, whilst a female planet in Leo will be given a more masculine
expression. However, the malefic planets (Sun, Mars and Saturn) will be easier to cope with if
they are in the male hora.
•    The drekkana chart - three divisions of 10º each
The drekkana chart is calculated in the same way as the hora chart, but with three groups of signs
rather than two. In this varga signs in the same elements are linked: the first 10º subdivision of
any sign is ruled by its own ruler, the second 10º by the ruler of the sign five signs from it and
the final 10º of the chart are ruled by the ruler of the sign nine signs away. So the lagna or any
planets in the subdivision 0 -10º Leo will be ruled by Leo’s ruler the Sun; anything in 10 - 20º
Leo will be ruled by Sagittarius’ ruler Jupiter; and anything in 20 - 30º Leo will be ruled by
Aries’ ruler Mars. The table for the drekkana varga is given at the end of the chapter.

<<<PAGE 169>>>
The drekkana chart can be used to fine-tune the issues of the third house of your rasi chart:
your siblings - a relationship which in Indian society is not to be set aside lightly; your friends,
the alliances you might make, your courage, ability and motivation. The position of Mars is
paramount - a debilitated Mars would suggest lowered vitality, low self-confidence, and a
general lack of direction.
•    The chaturtamsha chart - four divisions of 7º30' each
The four subdivisions of this chart are ruled by the first, fourth, seventh and tenth sign from the
sign whose divisions are being calculated, linking signs in the same mode. So, if the sign being
divided is Aries, the four divisions will be ruled respectively by the rulers of Aries, Cancer, Libra
and Capricorn. If Gemini is being divided this way, the rulers of the subdivisions will be the
rulers of Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces. A chaturtamsha chart fine-tunes the fourth house
of the rasi chart and is used to study material comforts and pleasures, and your relationship with
your mother. It also shows what efforts will be needed to achieve your various objectives. The
chart can also focus on your inner emotions and happiness and your attitude towards comfort and
your home. The chaturtamsha table is shown at the end of the chapter.
•    The trimshamsha chart - five divisions of about 6º each
This varga is important in consultations as it focuses on the issues of the sixth house and the
obstacles we will meet. The Sun, Moon, Rahu and Ketu are not taken into account in its
interpretation. Rulership is as follows: in the odd numbered signs the first 5º are ruled by Mars
(Aries), the next 5º by Saturn (Aquarius), the next 8º by Jupiter (Sagittarius), the next 7º by
Mercury (Gemini) and the last 5º by Venus (Libra). In even signs this is reversed: the first 5º are
ruled by Venus (Taurus), the next 7º by Mercury (Virgo), the following 8º by Jupiter (Pisces),
the next 5º by Saturn (Capricorn) and the last 5º by Mars (Scorpio).
Interpretation focuses on Saturn as its position in the trimshamsha chart will indicate where
you will face challenges. The ascendant in this chart indicates how you will deal with them.
•    The saptamsha chart - seven divisions of 4º17' each
The subdivisions of a sign are ruled thus: if the sign being divided is an odd-numbered one -
Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius or Aquarius - then rulership will begin with that sign. Thus
0 - 4º17' Libra is ruled by Venus, ruler of Libra.
If the sign being divided is an even-numbered one - Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn
or Pisces - the rulership sequence begins with the ruling planet of the opposite sign. So 0 - 4º17'
of Scorpio will be ruled by Venus, ruler of Taurus, the next division will be ruled by Mercury,
ruler of Gemini, the next by the Moon, ruler of Cancer and so on.
The saptamsha chart focuses on the issues of the rasi chart’s fifth house. In Indian terms it is
very much about children and grandchildren: how many you will have and how good your
relationship with them will be. A broader and perhaps more westernised interpretation would
cover other forms of creativity. A strongly placed lagna in the saptamsha chart indicates a very
creative person and/or children and a good relationship with them. Check the fifth house ruler - if
it is in either the sixth, eighth or twelfth house there could problems relating to children. The
position of the fifth house karaka planet, Jupiter, should also be noted.
•    The navamsha chart - nine divisions of 3º20' each
This is the one varga chart that a Vedic astrologer would automatically use when preparing for a
consultation with a client, and it is the foundation chart of the rasi chakras. Most astrologers in

<<<PAGE 170>>>
India will automatically know the navamsha positions from the degrees of the ascendant and
planets - something a student should aspire to. The navamsha chart is particularly helpful in
relationship astrology. It highlights the issues of the auspicious ninth house: the positive karma
you will be able to call on during this lifetime, the level of happiness you might expect, and what
sort of future is indicated for you. The navamsha chart reflects how the resources of the inner self
copes with the ups and downs of everyday life and the spiritual challenges encountered by the
outer self, and whether there will be a conflict between the two. It also shows those parts of your
personality which you may be reaching towards in your life, but which may still be causing you
some stress at present because progress is slow. We seem to grow into our navamsha charts as
we get older. They are calculated in two steps:
- find which division of 3º 20' the planet (or ascendant) is in on the rasi chart and note its
navamsha number
- find the cardinal sign in the same element; this is where you will count from.
The 30º are divided into 9 as follows:
Rulerships begin with the ruler of the cardinal sign in the same element:
sign being sub-divided   
start counting at..
Aries, Leo, Sagittarius   
Aries
Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn      Capricorn
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius   
Libra
Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces   
Cancer
As an example, consider Venus at 10º 20' Aquarius. From the first table we see that it falls into
the 4th navamsha section. Aquarius is an air sign, and we find from the second table that the
cardinal air sign is Libra. Count four signs on starting from Libra which takes us to Capricorn -
so in the navamsha chart Venus has moved to Capricorn.
The placements of Venus (for men) and Jupiter (for women) in the navamsha chart are the
important ones for relationship astrology: studying them will add depth and subtlety to the rasi
chart’s indications of whether the person will be able to form good relationships, and with
whom. Actual interpretation is the same as for the rasi chart. If Venus or Jupiter is in the 6th, 8th
or 12th house this will create problems for the person in their relationships. Placements in the
navamsha chart can throw light on problems already showing in the rasi chart; or alleviate them.

<<<PAGE 171>>>
A woman with Jupiter conjunct Rahu in the seventh house of her rasi chart might have always
had problems in relationships. In the navamsha chart her Jupiter might be in Aries. Aries is ruled
by Mars and Mars and Jupiter are friends. Together, they indicate the possibility of improvement
through understanding: the woman could take action (Mars) and learn (Jupiter) to become wiser
(Jupiter) in her dealings with her partners.
Planets which are poorly placed in the rasi chart will become weakened in the navamsha,
while well-placed ones will have their strength enhanced.
Navamsha position of the dasha ruler
The position of the dasha ruler in the navamsha chart is very important; it indicates the inner
quality of the dasha period. If it is well placed by exaltation or mooltrikona (you need to refer to
planetary strengths here too) the quality of the dasha will be enhanced. The opposite will create
difficulties. With practice you will see the navamsha chart gives the underlying foundation and
therefore more understanding of the dasha period too. The house where the dasha ruler is placed
will also indicate which issues will come to the fore. If it is placed in the tenth house of career in
the rasi chart, but the seventh in the navamsha, the dasha will affect both the career and
relationships during its period.
Vargottama
A planet is vargottama when it is placed in the same sign in the rasi and the navamsha charts.
This is considered the perfect position in the zodiac and is supposed to make the planet as strong
as if it were in exaltation. Even if the planet is debilitated this position will strengthen it
enormously.
The vargottama positions for rasi/navamsha charts are:
Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn  
00º - 03º20'
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius  
13º20' - 16º00'
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces  
26º40' - 30º00'
•    The dashamsha chart - 10 divisions of 3º each
The dashamsha chart focuses on the issues of the tenth house: career, ambition, status and life
direction, and is one of the most frequently used varga charts. Calculation is not dissimilar to that
for the navamsha chart - the 30 degrees are divided into segments of 3 degrees each:
00º -  03º      1st part
03º -  06º      2nd
06º -  09º      3rd
09º -  12º      4th
12º -  15º      5th
15º -  18º      6th
18º -  21º       7th
21º -  24º      8th
24º -  27º      9th
27º -  30º      10th

<<<PAGE 172>>>
With odd-numbered signs the ten subdivisions of each sign begin with the sign being divided;
with even-numbered signs they begin with the sign nine signs further round the zodiac from the
one being divided.
The sub-divisions of:
Taking the example of Venus at 10º 20' Aquarius again, it falls in the fourth part of the first table
and as Aquarius is an odd numbered sign, we count four signs on starting from there; the
dashamsha position of Venus is Taurus.
The position of the planet which rules the tenth house of the rasi chart is the most important
one in the dashamsha and the subdivision it is in will shed further light on your career. The
position of the Sun is also important as it signifies status. If the ruler of the ascendant of the rasi
chart is in the tenth subdivision of the dashamsha chart, career and status issues will be a very
important influence on your life.
•    The dwadashamsha chart - 12 divisions of 2º30' each
Giving further information on the issues of the twelfth house in the rasi chart, this is the past life
varga. In it you can see something of your previous incarnation; it gives indications of the karma
you bring forward into this life. You can take this process into lives further back with the
Chaturvimsha chart, also called the Siddhamsha (see further on). Rulerships within the
dwadashamsha chart start from the sign itself: an ascendant on the rasi chart at 1º Sagittarius will
remain in Sagittarius in the dwadashamsha chart, ruled by Jupiter.
This chart is often thought of as the ‘mother and father’ chart - because your choice of mother
and father in this life is part of your karma from past incarnations. Being born into a difficult
relationship with one or both parents is seen as an attempt to become a more mature soul.
However, this chart is not just about the past; as well as highlighting past-life issues likely to be
prominent again in this one, it can be a powerful tool in helping you recognise your potential in
this incarnation. It is interpreted in the same way as the rasi chart; grahas, house positions,
rulerships and all meanings are the same; you can also make a chart showing the Sun or Moon on
the ascendant just as you can with the rasi chart. The most important planets to assess are, of
course, the Sun and Moon. The Sun represents the soul’s path to the future - in a dwadashamsha
chart, that is this present life, so it can throw light on current situations. For example, someone
with Sun in Capricorn in the rasi chart but in Aquarius in the dwadashamsha chart indicates that,
although in a past life they were learning to shed their ego and live more spiritually, in this one
they need a more ‘feet firmly on the ground’ kind of existence. The Moon in a dwadashamsha
chart represents the life before - in a dwadashamsha chart that is the life before last. As Rahu and
Ketu have the same meanings in a dwadashamsha chart as in a rasi chart, Moon conjunct Ketu in
the dwadashamsha chart indicates heavy-duty karma in the life before this one, from the life
before that. The sign and rulership of the ascendant describes your physical being and
personality in your last life. Every area of your life is covered by the dwadashamsha chart,

<<<PAGE 173>>>
mostly issues that you have already worked out. Here are details of other varga charts:
Shodhashamsha - 16 parts of 1º52'30" each
This varga chart emphasises fourth house issues like transport, the home, assets and your inner
emotions.
Vimshamsha - 20 parts of 1º30' each
This varga chart looks at religious issues.
Chaturvimsha or Siddhamsha - 24 parts of 1º15' each
This varga chart looks more closely at the past life already highlighted in the dwadashamsha
chart, but with a particular purpose in mind. It assesses your spiritual capabilities in this lifetime;
your ability and willingness to pursue the spiritual life comes from the experience accumulated
in your past lives.
Saptavimshamsha or Bhamsha - 27 parts of 1º6' each
Whereas the nakshatras divide the whole zodiac into 27 equal parts, this calculation does the
same for one zodiac sign, and it is used to highlight your personal strengths and weaknesses.
Khavedamsha - 40 parts of 0º45' each
This varga focuses on your quality of life.
Akshavedamsha - 45 parts of 0º40' each
This varga chart is essentially like the rasi chart, but pinpointing the effects of the exact degree of
the planet placements.
Shastiamsha - 60 parts of 0º30' each
The shastiamsha chart is frequently used in electional astrology in India. It is also used to
differentiate between twins, whose shastiamsha charts will be different, but of course exact birth
times are a necessity here. (In India the first breath is taken as the moment of birth.)
Interpretation of the shastiamsha and the rasi charts are not the same - planets placed in benefic
shashtiamsha are enhanced and planets in malefic shastiamsha are obstructed.
Using groups of varga charts
Specialised computer software produces the varga charts very quickly, although most astrologers
only use the shadvarga or saptavarga vimshopak (planetary strength) groups. The great
importance of the vimshopak calculations is that they are used to work out the dashas: when they
will occur and whether they will be good or bad. Weak planets (low vimshopak totals) will
create difficulties and the strong ones will enhance the dashas. Planetary strengths are covered in
detail in the Graha chapter. There are four groupings of vargas :
Shodasavarga   -   all 16 divisional charts taken into consideration
Dashavarga
  -   10 vargas: rasi, hora, drekkana, navamsha, dwadashamsha, trimshamsha,
saptamsha, dashamsha, shodhamsha, and shastiamsha
Saptavarga
  -   7 vargas: rasi, hora, drekkana, navamsha, dwadashamsha, trimshamsha and

<<<PAGE 174>>>
saptamsha
Shadvarga
  -   6 vargas: rasi, hora, drekkana, navamsha, dwadashamsha and trimshamsha.
Drekkana Table
Navamsha Table
Chaturtamsha Table
Saptamsha Table
Dashamsha Table

<<<PAGE 175>>>
Dwadashamsha Table

<<<PAGE 176>>>
The Gunas
According to ancient Vedic philosophy, creation is the product of the meeting of purusha and
prakriti - the male and female influences. Prakriti is the main element, the female regenerative
forces and it is full of desires and needs. Purusha (which also represents the soul) meets prakriti
to create life. The purpose of purusha is to enjoy what prakriti has to offer, and prakriti has to
fulfil the desires of purusha. When this cosmic birth takes place ahankara or individual
ego/intellect is born. Ahankara gives birth to all the senses and the mind. In astrological terms
then, purusha is represented by the Sun, prakriti by the Moon, and ahankara by Mercury. Once
we start to think for ourselves we also wonder what our position is in the cosmos; and at that
point, when we actually care who and what we are, the ego is born. Consciousness has a balance
of the three qualities sattva, rajas and tamas. Once this universal consciousness identifies with
individuality, one of the three qualities or gunas become out of balance and we reflect that
quality in our birth. It is important to understand the impulses (gunas) of the planets that give
them their unique behaviour- patterns so you can identify them in your own chart. The gunas
appear in the personality as both positive and negative characteristics.
‘Guna’ also means ‘strand’, the strands of twine that make up a rope. The rope is seen here as
an allegory to personality. The various strands, or gunas, entwine to produce the individuality of
a person. The attribute of each guna is usually seen as mental rather than physical, but the mind
has a great capacity to affect the physical side of our life.
We all have a balance of the gunas within us. They express themselves as a mental attitude
that leads us to see life in a certain way and have particular priorities, and it is vital that we
recognise both the gifts and the challenges that they have to offer in our lives. Looking through
the descriptions below, you will probably find some aspects easier to understand than others.
How does this relate to your own balance? Can you appreciate both the positive and the negative
sides of your predominant guna?
Sattva is the attribute of purity. ‘Sat’ means being, existing, pure, true and real. ‘Va’ means
where purity dwells. A sattvic person believes in purity of being, thought, and action. Water is
pure sattva. Vegetarianism is sattvic because it rejects killing animals to satisfy the need to eat.
Sattvic people have a mental attitude that emphasises purity.
Sattvic people believe in Truth and seek the good of others through their own deep spirituality.
They are fearless, generous, self-controlled, tranquil, charitable and generally have an open

<<<PAGE 177>>>
mind. They find it hard to hurt others. They are able to rise above worldly matters and face the
dramas of daily life with equilibrium; they still experience pain and unhappiness, but the way of
dealing with them is different.
Whilst it might sound a wonderful, idyllic state to aim for, being sattvic and all that the image
implies can present a huge challenge. The responsibilities of day-to-day existence are a necessary
part of life on earth, and although sattvic people are drawn to a state of contemplation and inner
quiet, they have to find a way to survive ‘out there’ too. The path towards enlightenment and
higher consciousness is not an easy one, and the qualities of the other gunas are very much
needed to bring a sense of balance into their lives.
On the negative side, sattvic people can take asceticism to extremes and be very self-righteous.
They can find it impossible to understand those on a different path from themselves and to allow
them their own self expression. Good examples are vegetarians not allowing others to eat meat,
or the animal liberationists who use the threat of violence to further their cause; in fact here,
people are only pretending to be sattvic. Their guna changes when they lose their purity. Their
initial impulse may have been sattvic but the method of carrying it out becomes tamasic or
rajasic. Sattva works very much on the abstract level.
Rajas is the cause of activity in mankind, and is the searching quality that as humans, we all
have. It can be translated as ‘pollen of the flowers’, ‘a particle in the sunbeams’ or ‘emotional,
moral or mental darkness’. ‘Pollen of the flowers’ indicates the potential of pollen to create new
flowers - humans activating more life; experiencing life and birth. ‘A particle in the sunbeam’ - a
sunbeam is pure and the particle introduces a new element into its purity. ‘Moral, emotional or
mental darkness’ is the inability of humans to see the answers within themselves, with the result
that they seek fulfilment in the material, illusionary world. Rajasic people have a mental attitude
that emphasises strong emotional impulses. They can be described as being led by passion
towards achievement of their material desires, but to find true happiness they need to look
within.
Rajasic people are driven by a great inner thirst; they are easily moved by their feelings. They
are very active, mentally and physically, and are continually searching for new challenges. They
are high-achievers, wanting recognition, respect and success.
On the more difficult side it is true that rajasic people can be so restless they can’t settle into
either their work or relationships. They have a tendency to cling to pleasant tasks while avoiding
difficult situations. They lack peace of mind because they are unsure of what they really want;
they are continually seeking answers in the outer world whereas what they are looking for is
within themselves. Western culture is generally considered to be rajasic. Rajas moves between
the abstract and the practical.
Tamas is the attribute of darkness. The Sanskrit word can also be translated as ‘ignorance’,
making it plain that the darkness is a mental one. Tamasic people have a mental attitude that
emphasises sensuality. They can be described either as being led by a lack of knowledge or a
dearth of spiritual insight to a life focusing on human sensual desires. Vedic philosophy
encourages tamasic people to dispel their darkness with the light of spiritual insight. Tamasic
people revel in the everyday, material world; preferably one with lots of good food and good
company. They usually view life in the here and now and allow their desires to dominate their
actions. These desires keep them tied to the world of happiness and unhappiness - through their
own needs they create their own problems.
It is important to stress here that all three gunas are present in the natal chart but the balance of

<<<PAGE 178>>>
them will be different for each of us; we can be influenced by our own desires (tamas) and at the
same time be on a spiritual quest (sattva) to make this world a better place (rajas). However,
maya, the illusionary world of self gratification and sensual living, ties tamasic people to their
own desires. They tend to view the material world as the only reality and can be very greedy for
all it can offer - for example, they often have weight problems! Yoga and meditation can help to
strengthen their inner being and make them aware of the spiritual side of existence.
Qualities of the Planets, Signs and Houses
The lists below show the qualities of each planet, sign and house. The guna of your ascendant
will be determined by the sign it occupies.
The Planets
Sattvic           Rajasic           
Tamasic
The Sun           Venus           
Saturn
Moon           
Mercury*           Mars
Jupiter           
Rahu
Ketu
* Adaptable Mercury is generally interpreted as taking on the guna attribute of those planets it is
aspecting in any chart.
Ketu can be a very sattvic planet under the right circumstances.
The Signs
Sattvic           
Rajasic           Tamasic
Cancer           
Aries           
Virgo
Leo           
Taurus           Scorpio
Sagittarius           Gemini           Capricorn
Pisces           
Libra           
Aquarius
Gemini is usually considered to have all three gunas; it is Tri Guni.
The Houses
Sattvic           Rajasic           Tamasic
4th           
1st           
6th
5th           
2nd           
8th
9th           
3rd           
10th
12th           
7th           
11th
Calculating the gunas in your chart
To study the gunas in your own natal chart you need to look at these key points:

<<<PAGE 179>>>
•     the ascendant
•     the Moon sign
•     the Sun sign
•     the position of the other planets, their gunas, and the overall influence of the gunas
Rahu and Ketu are tamasic. Rahu is purely tamasic, and it affects mainly the practical areas of
life. Ketu’s tamas is shaded with sattva, which is to do with searching for enlightenment, but its
being called tamasic indicates the issues that Ketu represents have to be faced in this world.
However, these intrinsic qualities will be overridden by the guna of the planet that rules the sign
they are in.
For each key point in your chart:
1)   determine which guna it has in its natural state
2)   look at the sign it is in; this will indicate its focus
3)   its house will indicate how and where this focus is directed
Key Points
You will probably have a combination of qualities - use the section below to understand how
they work together:
•     All sattvic
Your key point will be acting at its purest level.
•     Two sattvic, one rajasic
If a key point in your chart is sattvic and also placed in a sattvic sign it will be pure and natural in
its inclinations. But if it is placed in a rajasic house, it will need to carry out its activities in an
active (rajasic) manner. You may feel the drive and dissatisfaction the rajasic guna gives. These
urges will need to be satisfied but the end you strive towards will be a sattvic one.
If your key point is sattvic and placed in a rajasic sign but in a sattvic house, you will
experience a great deal of inner conflict. However, as sattvic gunas outnumber the rajasic, your
sattvic qualities will predominate.
•     Two sattvic, one tamasic
When a sattvic key point is placed in a sattvic sign but in a tamasic house, you will need to act
out its sattvic guna in a practical, tamasic manner. There will be times when this is difficult as it
contradicts your inner nature.
If you have a sattvic key point in a tamasic sign you will be pulled two ways by conflicting
impulses: negative/positive, cosmic/earthly, idealism/practicality. If the key point is in a sattvic
house it will enable the guna of sattva to be predominant.
•     All three rajasic

<<<PAGE 180>>>
The rajasic energy will be very strong.
•     Two rajasic, one tamasic
If your key point is rajasic and is placed in a rajasic sign but in a tamasic house, the need to be
active and to achieve can be thwarted by practical considerations.
When you have a rajasic key point in a tamasic sign, you will go back and forth between
activity and stasis, ambition and laziness, changeability and stability. If the key point is in a
rajasic sign your rajasic impulses will be stronger than your tamasic tendencies, which will have
to follow in a rajasic direction.
•     Two rajasic, one sattvic
A rajasic key point in a rajasic sign but in a sattvic house can make you unhappy with your
spiritual direction. However, the general restlessness of rajas can make it hard for you to
maintain that sattvic focus. A rajasic person with sattvic direction might be tempted to look for
personal gain from their principles and actions.
•     All three tamasic
If you have a key point which is tamasic of itself, by sign and by house, its energy will be taken
up almost entirely by practical concerns. It will lead making the kind of choices which result in a
build up of negative karma.
When the tamasic impulse is this strong, you will not be able to adapt to change or develop
your spiritual side very easily.
•     Two tamasic, one rajasic
A tamasic key point in a tamasic sign works in a practical but worldly way. The rajasic house
makes it focus on change, activity and ambition. As tamasic people find it very difficult to adapt,
you will experience inner conflict concerning the eventual direction of your ambitions. If you
have a tamasic key point in a rajasic sign you will struggle between keeping things the same and
making changes. If it is in a tamasic house, the balance of the two forces leans towards inactivity
and your rajasic ambitions will be frustrated. It is be important to allow your rajasic side nature
appropriate expression.
•     Two tamasic, one sattvic
A tamasic key point in a tamasic sign but in a sattvic house will create great turmoil. The focus is
towards purity but its inherent nature is materialistic. The conflict is that much greater if the key
point is your ascendant, Moon or Sun, but you can achieve a balance through yoga and
meditation.
When the tamasic key point is in a sattvic sign, it does not want to deal with the spiritual
energy which is being activated. This is usually a difficult combination, but it can be rewarding if
you activate the sattvic energy.
•     One of each guna
If any key point in your chart is exposed to all three influences, its house position becomes very
important - this will indicate which guna will dominate. The combination of all three gunas can
create a wonderful blend of energies - but in practice, it is difficult to make that happen. Tensions
are created within you as to what you really want from life. You should also see which other key
points are placed within the same house, as their influence may have a bearing on the direction

<<<PAGE 181>>>
you eventually take.
Chart Example
To illustrate how this works in real life, let us study His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama, focusing
on the energy of the gunas in his chart (shown on the next page). The Dalai Lama was born to be
the spiritual leader of an isolated kingdom deep in the Himalayas, so we would expect to see the
sattvic guna dominate, but in reality he was forced from his home by the invasion of the Chinese
and now lives a life of exile in India. From his travels around the world he has made an
international impact with his form of philosophy and practice of Tibetan Buddhism. We would
expect his chart therefore to reflect the fact that he is now regarded as a spiritual leader by people
from many different religions and cultures.
The Dalai Lama’s Sun is in Gemini, which reflects all three gunas. The Sun is a sattvic planet
so Gemini will accentuate his sattvic nature and the higher thinking (Mercury) he brings in from
beyond - its twelfth house position also indicates the personal sacrifices he has had to make for
the sake of his beliefs.
His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama
Birth data (not fully confirmed):
6th July 1935
6:00 (-7:00) Taktser, Amdo, Tibet.
Rasi Chart
His ascendant is in sattvic Cancer and its ruler, the Moon, is also sattvic; together the two
indicate that the Dalai Lama will be concerned with purity and spirituality in this life.
The Moon is coloured by Leo which is sattvic as well - but placed in a rajasic house. The
Dalai Lama accepts the responsibility of his homeland and defending his people (action -
rajasic), but by the exemplary use of diplomacy and a fundamental belief in the good of
humanity, rather than by physical violence. The traditional Leo ambition is redirected towards
guiding his people. Experiencing the rajasic guna himself makes it easier for the Dalai Lama to

<<<PAGE 182>>>
understand the Western mind which it is usually rajasic in nature. Leo has the ability to
overcome the rajasic location (second house).
Mercury is in Gemini in the sattvic twelfth house. It is tri guni, taking on the energy of the
planet it conjuncts. As the Dalai Lama has a Sun/Mercury conjunction, Mercury will also act in a
sattvic way like the Sun. This shows clearly in his ability to both talk to, and get other people to
talk about, the problem that most occupies his mind - his homeland.
Saturn is tamasic, rules his seventh house, and is placed in tamasic Aquarius in the tamasic
eighth house (which it also rules). The seventh house is rajasic by nature, so there will be some
conflict here; we know that the Dalai Lama would never have the option to give up his worldly
responsibilities and retreat into a totally spiritual environment as reflected by the qualities of the
Moon and the Sun. Saturn will keep him firmly attached to his practical considerations, but his
way of dealing with them is purely sattvic.
Venus is a rajasic planet placed in the sattvic sign of Leo with the sattvic Moon - this which
enable him to resist temptation and keep his desires pure. Venus is in a rajasic house - the
second. There could have been temptations on his path, but the intense sattvic purity of the planet
that rules Venus, the Sun, indicates that the Dalai Lama is more than able to control his desires
and activate the higher energies of Venus.
Mars, a tamasic planet, is placed in Virgo, another tamasic sign and rajasic house (third). This
is the house for self motivation and action, and Mars - the best planet for Cancer ascendants as it
rules the fifth and tenth houses - is well-placed there. In the past the Dalai Lama would
traditionally have stayed in Tibet and remained all but invisible to the rest of the world, but Mars
has given him the impetus to travel widely - resulting in many converts to Buddhism and a much
higher profile for Tibet. The tamasic quality of the Mars/Virgo combination gives him both the
courage to speak out and the clarity of thought to ensure his message will be understood.
Jupiter is a sattvic planet, but it is placed in Libra which is a rajasic sign, in the rajasic fourth
house. Jupiter represents wisdom and philosophy, whilst rajas is about ambition, activity and
action; this combination gives him the ability to communicate with the West, which is usually
regarded as rajasic in quality.
Rahu and Ketu are tamasic by guna, but will act like the planet which rules the house they
are placed in. Ketu, the past life indicator is ruled by Mercury (acting as sattvic) and is placed in
the twelfth house of enlightenment, indicating that past incarnations have prepared the Dalai
Lama for his spiritual path. Rahu is ruled by the sattvic/rajasic Jupiter, but is in the tamasic sixth
house of obstacles and enemies. Rahu gives the Dalai Lama the necessary drive to confront the
might of China and enlist the help of the rest of the world in his attempts to regain his spiritual
heritage.
The Dalai Lama’s Gunas at a Glance
The planets - how they reflect their qualities in his chart:
Sattvic              Rajasic              Tamasic
Sun              
Jupiter              Mars
Moon               Rahu              
Saturn
Mercury
Ketu
Venus

<<<PAGE 183>>>
The table of planets suggest that the Dalai Lama’s inner life is completely sattvic. The Sun (his
consciousness), the Moon (his mind), and Mercury (his intellect and speech) are all influenced
by the sattvic guna. His moksha (enlightenment) and spiritual realisation planet Ketu is also
influenced by sattva. Venus, the potentially sensuous side of his nature, becomes sattvic, so his
inner self is deeply spiritual. His outer persona has an equal influence of tamas and rajas, which
keeps him very much in touch with the outside world.
The signs where the planets are placed:
Sattvic              
Rajasic              Tamasic
Sagittarius              Gemini              Virgo
Leo               
Libra              
Aquarius
The balance of the planets is equally divided. This indicates the Dalai Lama’s inner harmony and
also his ability to work on all levels.
and finally the qualities of the houses:
Sattvic              
Rajasic              
Tamasic
(4, 5, 9, 12)              (1, 2, 3, 7)              (6, 8, 10, 11)
The Sun               
Moon              
Mars
Mercury               
Venus               
Rahu
Ketu               
Saturn
Jupiter               
The Overall Planetary Indications
Mercury is tri guni and will reflect the planet it conjuncts Ketu can be sattvic under the right
circumstances.
We can see that the houses occupied by the planets are predominantly sattvic, but rajas and
tamas are also prominent and it is this that gives him the overall ability to work out in the real
world. The experience of life is considered tamasic and our search for spirituality is essentially
rajasic; if the Dalai Lama were to have followed his highly sattvic nature, he would not have
been able to deal with the worldly issues which are the domain of rajas and tamas. Also, as a
continously reincarnating spiritual figure, his purpose is not to find enlightenment for himself,

<<<PAGE 184>>>
but to guide others towards it.

<<<PAGE 185>>>
The Yogas
The concept of yogas is unique to Vedic astrology and recognised by planetary combinations
placed in specific relationships to each other. The important thing to realise about the yogas is
that they show the maturity of the soul and, through various tests, will help it to develop and
progress along the evolutionary path it has chosen. Of course you can have yogas which ease the
way as well as those which seem to create difficulties for no obvious reason other than to make
you grind to a halt.
There are many yogas and it would be impossible to illustrate them all, so we will concentrate
on those that are usually considered in a normal consultation. The astrologer studies them first to
give an indication of the special qualities of your chart; only then will they consider the other
aspects. It’s also important to realise that not everybody has a yoga in their chart. The lack does
not put one at some kind of disadvantage !
The yogas can also be looked at from the Moon and Sun ascendant charts. In the divisional
charts like the navamsha and drekkna they can be used identify specific areas in your life.
The Panchamahapurusha Yogas
‘Panch’ means ‘five’ and ‘Mahapurusha’ means ‘exalted person’. The Panchamahapurusha
yogas are a combination that indicate a very special individual. They are formed when Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are in their own sign or in exaltation in the kendras (first,
fourth, seventh and tenth houses). The kendra houses are the foundation to life and a person with
the Panchamahapurusha yoga is going to make an extraordinary impact on the environment and
those he comes into contact with; this sense of ‘greatness’ in an individual is due to
repercussions from past lives. Panchamahapurusha relates to conditions for individual success
based on karma of the past. The important consideration here is that these yogas can become
spoilt or reduced if they are placed with or aspected by rulers of malefic houses - third, sixth,
eighth, eleventh, or twelfth. The yoga still exists but its power is reduced. If it is conjunct Rahu
or Ketu, it becomes powerful in a karmic way. The results then become unpredictable.
Ruchaka Yoga
Mars in its own or exaltation sign in kendras - Mars in Aries, Scorpio or Capricorn.
When Mars produces this yoga, it indicates a very powerful person who has the ability to
externalise his talents. Action and energy are the keywords here. It could be in the field of sports,

<<<PAGE 186>>>
adventure, defence or in an area where power, aggression and authority are required. Ruchaka
yoga makes an individual very ambitious with the ability to achieve whatever they set their
minds to. They will be extremely successful in gaining their worldly desires.
Bhadra Yoga
Mercury in its own or exalted sign in kendras - Mercury in Gemini or Virgo.
When Mercury produces this yoga it indicates a powerful intellect. Someone who can clearly
and profoundly. They will be wise, academic, knowledgeable and be able to influence others
through speech and writing.
Hamsa Yoga
Jupiter in its own or exalted sign in kendras - Jupiter in Sagittarius, Pisces or Cancer.
When Jupiter produces this yoga, it indicates a person with great sattvic thoughts and
knowledge. Hamsa yoga makes one ethical and truthful and gives the ability to influence the
most powerful people of the land. This is an exalted soul who wants to impart wisdom and
knowledge to others without the need for material rewards. The connection towards divinity is
strong. Hamsa yoga also produces people who are highly sexed and may not be happy with one
partner. Their sexuality usually does not have an adverse effect on their reputation.
Malavya Yoga
Venus in its own or exalted sign in kendras - Venus in Taurus, Libra or Pisces.
When Venus produces this yoga, the individual has the ability to be greatly successful in the
material world. This shows immense attraction, beauty and charm, wealth and material success.
Malavya yoga shows a person who is very popular and can be famous. Their knowledge of
spiritual literature can be deep and they use this to enhance their earthly resources.
Shasha Yoga
Saturn in its own or exalted sign in kendras - Saturn in Capricorn, Aquarius or Libra.
When the placement of Saturn produces this yoga, it indicates a commanding personality;
someone who is not interested in being popular or sociable but will be a strong champion for
unfashionable causes. Here is a person who will shoulder great responsibility and will not be
afraid of facing karmic issues in life. Sex can be enjoyed as a way of understanding the partner,
not just to satisfy desire.
Any yoga dealing with kendras will play an important part in raising profile. It endows an
individual with the ability to work at higher levels than others in order to fulfil special roles. The
Sun and Moon are excluded from these yogas as they show the connection of the individual with
the eternal; if they are in their own houses or in exaltation it creates other special situations
which are more linked to the infinite.
Raja Yoga
Raja Yoga is known as a ‘king-making’ combination. Nowadays this indicates the ability to
attain success. As in Jyotish we believe that good karma from previous lives will affect us in this
one as well, Raja yoga in a birth chart will show inherent tendencies which make the person
especially great. It doesn’t mean that this ‘greatness’ will come automatically, but that extra
effort will be rewarded with special results. This yoga drives a person to aim for higher things
and be ambitious. The important thing to understand is that the Raja yoga does not just indicate

<<<PAGE 187>>>
great monetary wealth, it could indicate wealth of knowledge, respectability and status as well.
Raja yoga is an auspicious combination of the fifth and ninth house rulers with the rulers of
the kendras. It can be created by aspects, parivartana (mutual reception) and conjunctions. The
strongest Raja yogas are created by:
•     Ruler of the ninth house in the tenth and the tenth house ruler in the ninth
•     Rulers of the ninth and tenth houses placed in the ninth or tenth houses
•     Rulers of any trikona house (fifth and ninth) linked to any kendra house (first, fourth,
seventh and tenth) and if they are placed in any of the above houses.
The Raja yoga indicates good luck and success. This brings about great success during the dasha
and sub dashas. Some planets create Raja yogas by themselves, like Mars for Leo and Cancer
ascendants, Venus for Capricorn and Aquarius ascendants and Saturn for Taurus and Libra
ascendants. The quality of the yoga depends on how well the planets are placed. There will be
obvious differences if a yoga is formed when two planets are well placed in their house of
friends, exaltation or mooltrikona. In the case of a Leo ascendant this might for example be Mars
in Leo and the Sun in Aries. There is no aspect here but there is Parivartana (mutual reception)
as Mars is in the sign of Leo and the Sun is in Aries. Here the rulers of the first and ninth houses
are in mutual reception. Mars is very happy in his friend’s house and the Sun is exalted. This
yoga would differ if it was formed by the Sun and Mars conjoining in Aquarius in the seventh
house. Saturn, the ruler of Aquarius, is the enemy to both the Sun and Mars, so for this Raja yoga
to give result, there would first be delay or obstruction caused by Saturnian influence.
Neechabhanga RajaYoga - Cancellation of Debilitation
This is one of the most important yogas to consider when starting out on your journey as a
student of Vedic astrology. ‘Neech’ means ‘debilitated’, ‘Bhanga’ means ‘cancellation’. Many
new students are concerned that debilitated planets in a chart mean some kind of weaknesses, but
this is where a little learning can be dangerous. A planet which is debilitated may not act so
because of other conditions in the chart. In fact these conditions enhance the planet so much that
it becomes a very special planet with the ability to give results like a Raja yoga. So when is a
debilitated planet not debilitated? The rules are numerous. Here are some of them :
When the planetary ruler of the sign containing the debilitated planet is in its exaltation. For
example if the Sun is in Libra, Venus, the ruler is exalted.
When the ruler of the sign that the debilitated planet is placed in is in a kendra from the
ascendant or the Moon ascendant. For example, Jupiter is debilitated in Capricorn for an Aries
ascendant, but if Saturn, the ruler of Capricorn, was placed in a kendra house the there would be
a cancellation of debilitation. If we assume that the Moon is in Cancer, then Jupiter would also
be in a kendra; if we used a chart with the Moon as the ascendant it would be in the seventh
house from the Moon. Jupiter here will have a proper cancellation of its debilitation and
therefore will have the ability to be greatly beneficial.
When the planet which is debilitated in the rasi chart is exalted in the navamsha; for example
if Venus was in Virgo on the ascendant of the rasi chart but in Pisces in the navamsha chart.

<<<PAGE 188>>>
When the ruler of the sign of the debilitated planet and the ruler of its exalted planet are in
kendras from each other. Take the example of Saturn in Aries, where it would usually be
debilitated: if Mars (ruler of Aries) was in Capricorn, and Venus (ruler of Saturn’s exaltation
sign, Libra) was in Libra the two planets would be in kendras from each other and there will be a
cancellation of debilitation.
When the debilitated planet is conjunct the ruler of the sign of its debilitation. The Moon
placed with Mars in Cancer would create Neechbanga Rajayoga.
When the debilitated planet is aspected by the ruler of its sign. For a Moon debilitated in
Scorpio, Mars in Aries for example, would have an eighth house aspect to Scorpio and create the
cancellation of the debilitation.
The important thing to realise here is that a planet which appears to be debilitated will not
necessarily create problems. You have to understand the subtle energies of the planets and the
yogas before making that assumption.
Support Yogas to the Sun
Buddhi Aditya Yoga
This yoga is formed when the Sun and Mercury are conjunct. The Sun represents the eternal
connection and our soul, whereas Mercury is the conduit through which the desires of the soul
are expressed in this world. Mercury connects the subtle world with the physical world, so it
gives the ability to harness the subtle powers of nature, with the main emphasis being on
intellectual development.
Vasi Yoga
Vasi yoga is formed in the same way as the Anapha yoga when benefic planets, other than the
Moon, are placed in the twelfth house from the Sun.
Vesi Yoga
Vesi yoga is formed when benefics (not the moon) are placed in the second house from the Sun.
Both these yogas support the Sun and give strength to the chart.
Both Vasi and Vesi yogas show success, wealth and good fortune.
Obhachari Yoga
When benefics, other than the moon are present in the second and the twelfth houses from the
Sun. Again this yoga shows a popular person, well-liked and successful.
Yogas to the Moon
The Moon, as the significator of the mind and the reflection of the universal soul (the Sun) on
earth, is an important planet. It controls life on earth and therefore yogas to the Moon have an
important bearing on day to day functioning. There are many yogas indicating support to the
Moon; benefic planets on either side are considered very good as they give support, security and
strength. Even a malefic planet is better than nothing.
Adhi yoga

<<<PAGE 189>>>
When benefic planets are placed in the sixth, seventh and eighth houses from the Moon, the Adhi
yoga is formed. This yoga’s importance is again in support of the Moon. Planets placed here
would aspect the houses either side of the moon and enhancing the mind as well as giving
success, popularity and happiness.
Anapha Yoga
This yoga is formed by benefic planets in the twelfth house from the Moon. It shows princely
appearance, strong personality, good mind, fair reputation. Anapha yoga indicates success but
also giving up material aspects of life at a later date.
Sunapha Yoga
Benefic planets placed in the second house from the Moon. This indicates material success and
happiness.
Dhurudhura Yoga
This is formed when benefic planets are placed on either side of the Moon or in the adjoining
house - second and twelfth - from it. This gives a person success, eminence and wealth.
Gajakesari Yoga
This yoga is due to the relative positions of Jupiter and the Moon, which must be in the first,
fourth, seventh or tenth house from Jupiter. Again the quality of the yoga depends on the strength
of Moon and Jupiter; a yoga formed by a full or waxing Moon in Taurus and Jupiter in its
friendly sign of Scorpio will generate a different quality from one formed by a waning Moon in
Scorpio and Jupiter in Aquarius. In the latter situation the moon is debilitated and Jupiter is in the
sign of its enemy - Saturn.
Gajakesari yoga makes you wise, attractive, skilful and learned. It helps you to develop your
latent faculties and protects you from negative forces. Gajakesari is related to the Moon and
Jupiter brings out the inner strength of the Moon, the significator of the mind. This allows mental
capabilities to strengthen; a strong mind gives an individual the ability to overcome any
difficulty.
Sakata Yoga
Sakata yoga is created when the Moon and Jupiter are placed in the sixth, eighth and twelfth
houses from each other. So if the Moon is in Taurus and Jupiter in Libra (here the Moon is
placed in the eighth house from Jupiter), or the Moon is in Aries and Jupiter in Pisces (here
Jupiter is placed in the twelfth house from the Moon) there is a Sakata yoga. This is a difficult
yoga to have. It indicates that the placement of the benefic Jupiter from the Moon in the dusthana
house obstructs the free flow of fortune. People with Sakata yoga are considered very powerful
souls who are made to face difficulties in their present incarnation to learn some important
lessons. Sakata means a wheel and Sakata yoga makes a person evolve on a wheel of life. The
wheels rotate and so can life. There can be ups and downs, with sudden endings to be faced.
Sakata yoga usually leads to a person having to start all over again at various stages in life. The
combination of the mind (Moon) and wisdom (Jupiter) can create problems in overall expression.
Kemadruma Yoga
Kemadruma yoga is caused when there is no planet in the second or twelfth house from the
Moon, leaving it unsupported. With this yoga the mind can be difficult to discipline. The Moon

<<<PAGE 190>>>
as representative of the mind is usually at the root of all our problems and this particular yoga is
considered by the ancient sages to be the cause of poverty and difficulties. It is also said to
weaken other good yogas in the chart. The Sun is not considered here.
Kemadruma yoga is nullified if there are planets in conjunction to the Moon or in kendras
(fourth, seventh and tenth houses), and if it is a full Moon the yoga is said not to exist.
Yogas from Dusthana houses
These are contrary yogas which give strength to the individual when the planets that rule
dusthanas are placed in their own signs or each other’s signs. These yogas give enormous
success during their dasha periods and endow the individual with special attributes.
Vipireeta Raja Yoga
This is a special combination which gives great wealth. It is created when the rulers of the sixth,
eighth and twelfth houses are conjunct, placed anywhere in the chart; instead of creating
problems, they give great wealth and fortune. You can see this yoga from the Moon ascendant
chart as well; Bill Gates, the Microsoft billionaire, has this combination
Harsha Yoga
This yoga is formed when the ruler of the sixth house is placed there. Harsha means happiness.
This yoga brings good health, ability to confront obstacles, deal with difficulties, healing and
service to others. It indicates power through fair means.
Sarala Yoga
This yoga is formed when the eighth house ruler is placed in the eighth house. It makes a person
learned, long lived, wealthy, famous but there can be some hidden depths to the person which
can lead to negative use of power.
Vimala Yoga
This yoga is formed when the twelfth house ruler is placed in the twelfth house. It shows success
abroad and the ability to control expenses. As the house of isolation, it shows a strong
personality who finds it difficult to mix with others.
Other important yogas
Papakartari Yoga
Papakartari yoga is created when two malefic planets are placed on either side of the planet or
sign. This restricts the activity of the planet. If Mars and Saturn - two malefics - are placed in the
second and the twelfth houses from Venus, they will hem it in and stop it from functioning
properly.
Subhakartari Yoga
Shubhakartari yoga is formed when two benefic planets are on either side of a planet. This
enhances the quality of the planet. If Jupiter and Venus are placed on either side Mars its
energies will be greatly enhanced.
Dhana yogas - combinations for wealth
For Dhana (wealth) yogas to exist in a chart there have to be connections between the second

<<<PAGE 191>>>
(wealth, assets), eleventh (earnings, profits) and ninth house (good luck). If the rulers of these
house are in mutual aspect or conjunction, then a Dhana yoga is formed. Some ascendant signs
have one planet that rules both the second and the eleventh house: for a Leo ascendant, Mercury
rules both the second and eleventh houses, so if Mercury is conjunct Mars - the ninth house ruler
- then there is a Dhana yoga.
Jupiter rules the second and eleventh houses for Aquarius ascendants. Its conjunction with
Venus will create a Dhana yoga for people with Aquarius ascendants. For other ascendants, a
conjunction of the ninth house ruler with the eleventh house ruler will indicate a high earner. A
conjunction between the rulers of the ninth and second houses can show wealth from inheritance.
A conjunction of the second and eleventh house rulers is also considered a combination for
wealth but it will not be so strong as the luck factor (ninth house) is missing from it.
For the Dhana yoga to be strong it must not be placed in the dushtana houses (sixth, eighth or
twelfth).
Laxmi Yoga - immense wealth
Laxmi is the goddess of wealth. This yoga indicates a seriously wealthy person. It could be from
inheritance or through plain hard work. The ninth house ruler and Venus should be in their own
or exaltation signs, either in a kendra (first, fourth, seventh or tenth houses) or a trikona (fifth or
ninth houses). The yoga can be looked at from the relative positions of the ascendant, Moon and
Sun. If it exists from all these ascendants then unimaginable wealth is indicated.
Kal Sarpa Yoga
Kala Sarpa yoga is formed when Rahu and Ketu contain between them all the planets in the natal
chart. For example, where Rahu is 10 degrees Leo and Ketu 10 degrees Aquarius and all the
planets are ranged between these points; either from Leo to Aquarius or Aquarius to Leo
(remembering here of course that Vedic astrology does not use the outer planets Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto). For this yoga to be complete, no planet should conjunct Rahu or Ketu. It
contradicts completely any other indications on the chart - however capable the person, his life is
impeded due to past karma.
This yoga does not suggest either success or failure, rather the picture of somebody caught up
in karmic forces so great that they are forced to look at issues they have avoided in the past
before they can move forward. I’ve noticed this can appear to divide someone’s life into two
distinct parts.
Nelson Mandela has it in his chart and spent many years in prison before emerging to become
a political statesman. It is almost as though he had to pay a karmic debt before he could move on
to fulfil his destiny.
Paul McCartney has Kal Sarpa yoga and he cannot escape the legacy of the early years of the
Beatles. Whatever else he achieves, in whatever context, he will always be known as a Beatle.
In the political arena, Margaret Thatcher also has this yoga, and after being a major figure in
world politics she was dramatically ousted from her position as Prime Minister of the
Conservative party in the U.K., to live in relative obscurity. In complete contrast to this, a client
of mine who had lived in religious orders for 36 years underwent a dramatic change of heart and
realised that she wanted to return to life in the outside world.

<<<PAGE 192>>>
The Wheel of Vishnu
The Sudharshan Chakra: the Wheel of Vishnu
The sudarshana chakra is a very specialised chart, assessing the integration of our physical world
with the eternal. How we attempt to combine these different levels shows the depth of our
personality. The Vedic astrologer will consider three charts based on different ascendants: the
lagna, the chandra lagna (Moon on the ascendant) and the surya lagna (Sun on the ascendant).
The Wheel of Vishnu shows the lagna, chandra and surya charts as concentric circles,
demonstrating the three energies together but on different levels:
The surya chart describes the eternal connection which our soul brings with it into our current
physical body. It shows our inner self, our soul, and how it is connected to our past, present
and future. It indicates the direction in which our soul is moving.
The chandra chart describes the mental connection between the soul and the physical world -
how we express in everyday life the knowledge we carry within.
The lagna chart (the natal chart) describes the outer personality that results from the blending
of the eternal and mental energies. It also indicates the issues that will arise in this life.
If the rulers of the lagna, chandra and surya charts are all friends, the personality is fully
integrated; if they are enemies, the tensions between them cause friction. Your life will also be
easier if planets repeat their qualities, house placements and house rulerships in the two or three
different types of chart. If this is not the case, a careful assessment of the relative power of the
planets in each chart can reveal which ones are likely to be most influential and in what ways.
The three charts also give rather different information about you. The lagna chart represents the
physical body, the chandra your mind and the surya your inner consciousness and future
direction; together the three represent an integrated self.
When making predictions, Vedic astrologers look at the transits of planets to the chandra
ascendant, not the rasi ascendant. The Moon controls life on Earth; on the level of the individual,
the mind controls all actions, so transits to the chandra chart make a stronger impact on our lives.
I personally look at all three charts when assessing the likely effect of major transits: when
planets are making transits to all three charts (good or bad) their effect is greatly increased.

<<<PAGE 193>>>
The easiest way to understand this is to look at an example: I have chosen the chart of HRH
Prince Charles as it shows some interesting characteristics. His rasi chart is shown first, followed
by the sudharshan.
The innermost wheel is the surya chart with the Sun sign as the ascendant. Prince Charles’ Sun is
in Libra, so this becomes his ascendant at the soul level. Scorpio rules his second house,
Sagittarius the third and so on.
The middle circle is the chandra chart, with the Moon on the ascendant; it represents the mental
level. Prince Charles’ Moon is in Aries so it reflects the way he deals with spiritual questions on
a material level, and how he reconciles his physical and spiritual needs.
The outermost wheel is the rasi chart, with the Cancer ascendant reflecting the present
incarnation. Prince Charles’ physical body and his attitude towards daily life are thus symbolised
by the attributes of Cancer.
Rasi Chart
HRH Prince Charles
Born 14th November 1948 21.14 GMT London, England (51N 0W10).
Sun   
29°16'   Libra
Moon   
07°17'   Aries
Mercury   13°48'   Libra
Venus   
23°14'   Virgo
Mars   
27°48'   Scorpio
Jupiter   
06°44'    Sagittarius
Saturn   
12°07'   Leo
Rahu   
10°47'   Aries
Ketu   
10°47'   Libra
Sudharshan chart

<<<PAGE 194>>>
Surya Chart
On the eternal level - the Sun, Mercury and Ketu are placed in a Libra Ascendant. Prince
Charles’ Sun in Libra is at 29º13', almost the end of the sign. Libra is the sign where balance is
sought between the physical and the spiritual life. The Sun is debilitated in Libra, but this Sun
has moved past the debilitation degree, where involvement in the material world is total, so in
Prince Charles the balance has shifted towards the spiritual side. When the Sun is located so near
the end of a sign it indicates that one chapter of life is closing down and another opening.
However, some issues do have to be resolved before he can move on.
Ketu, the moksha karaka, is placed with the Sun. Ketu seeks enlightenment and wants to leave
mundane reality behind: it has a selfless purpose. Ketu is an enemy of the Sun and although there
was not an actual solar eclipse on the day Charles was born, symbolically it will always be
eclipsed by Ketu. Mercury takes on the character of any planet it conjuncts and in this chart it is
within 3º of Ketu; Mercury is more likely to take on Ketu’s persona than that of the Sun, almost
18º away. Ketu and Mercury combine together to eclipse Prince Charles on a soul level. This is a
soul which has lost its purpose. Its direction is towards spiritual enlightenment, but it has to
finish some important karmic issues before it can progress. Venus, as the dispositor of the Surya
lagna is debilitated in the twelfth house, indicating loss, imprisonment of the soul, and a
helplessness on that level.
Chandra Chart
On the mental level - the Moon and Rahu are placed in an Aries ascendant. As the first sign of
the zodiac Aries represents a new beginning, a fresh start in life; it is impulsive, militant,
adventurous and stubborn. An Aries person is not always willing to listen to others. Because
Aries is working at the mental level for him, Prince Charles continually needs to push back the
frontiers of conventional thought. He wants to take risks and to act first and think later, but this
in itself creates obstacles in his life.
Mars, the dispositor of Aries is in its own sign of the intense and spiritual Scorpio, which
usually fights between base instincts and higher aspirations. There is no halfway house here.
Rahu is closely conjunct the Moon. Rahu’s influence on the mental plane suggests that the soul
is guiding this mind through Ketu, the other end of the axis of the Moon’s nodes. The Moon is

<<<PAGE 195>>>
afraid of Rahu, an inner fear which cannot be fully expressed. It could be of failure or of
disappointment. The symbolic eclipse of the Sun in the soul chart is emphasised and increased by
the mental chart. Rahu creates immense ambition but it also brings with it anxiety and
unhappiness. Rahu will darken Prince Charles’ mind until it learns to see through the darkness.
The Moon is the significator of the public. The conjunction of the Moon with Rahu shows that
Prince Charles has an inherent fear of his public duties as well as the power of the masses. I think
he understands that his soul purpose is not on the material level but towards enlightenment.
However, he has an important act to perform in his material life which he fears but will have to
carry out; that act might result in the end of the monarchy as we know it.
Lagna Chart
On the physical level - no planets in the Cancer ascendant. There are no planets in this ascendant
house, but it is ruled by the Moon, which also rules his mental level. The Moon-Rahu
conjunction in the tenth house shows that Prince Charles has to live out his life on the world
stage, but in a way he will be eclipsed by others - for reasons which are not obvious to him.
The three levels together
All three levels of Prince Charles’ chart are ruled by a cardinal sign on the ascendant, so the three
second house signs are all fixed, the three third house signs are all mutable and so on. This
clearly shows a channelling of similar kinds of energy on all levels. Cardinal sign ascendants are
about leadership qualities; however, Prince Charles’ leadership qualities will not be allowed their
full expression until he succeeds to the throne, a karma which he cannot do anything about. He
has, though, managed to put his tenth house Moon (in the lagna chart) to good use in other areas.
Following the difficulties and upsets of recent years, Prince Charles has learnt to use his high
profile to bring areas close to his heart more into the public eye. In the chandra chart, his
ascendant ruler, Mars, is in the moksha eighth house, and in the surya chart, the ascendant ruler,
Venus, is in the moksha twelfth house. As a champion of alternative medicine and organic
gardening to name just two of his interests, he has succeeded in combining the spiritual needs
reflected by these planets with the physical requirements of his lagna ascendant.
Here we have looked only at the relationship between the different ascendants. You can study the
Sun and Moon charts more comprehensively to see what other insights are offered.

<<<PAGE 196>>>
Putting it all Together - A Chart Interpretation
I think the easiest way to synthesise all you’ve read so far is to go step-by-step through a chart
interpretation. You will notice as we go through each section there is sometimes conflicting
information regarding the condition of the planets and how well they work in the chart - this
always happens in an interpretation, and it is only by constant practice and following the threads
through to the end that we can finally draw a conclusion. You will also find that the same themes
crop up in different places, and whilst I have tried not to repeat the same information endlessly, it
is helpful to note which issues are becoming dominant. I have chosen Prince William because he
is well-known, and has a verified time of birth; when he was born a notice was posted outside
Buckingham Palace announcing the exact time of arrival. Also, the Vedic techniques we have
learnt so far reveal some fascinating insights into his chart. William Arthur Philip Louis is the
son of Prince Charles and the late Diana, Princess of Wales. He is the heir apparent with the title
Prince William of Wales.
It is common practice to show both the rasi and navamsha charts together. Whereas Western
charts show the degrees of the planets and their aspects Indian astrologers give very little detail
on the chart itself, so a list of the planets’ positions and their nakshatras appears alongside.
Prince William
21.6.82   21:03 BST   London 51N30 0W10
Rasi chart

<<<PAGE 197>>>
Navamsha chart

<<<PAGE 198>>>
Step One - The Basic Information
The first thing to do after erecting the chart is to make a Rasi Chakra grid, so you can see at a
glance how the planets relate to each other.

<<<PAGE 199>>>
It is immediately obvious from the rasi grid that all the planets are ruled either by Venus or
Mercury; the ascendant is ruled by Jupiter, which is placed in Libra, also ruled by Venus. When
planets form such a stark pattern, it shows an individual who has some important destiny to
fulfil.
Here are some other features of the rasi chart:
•     Sun Moon and Jupiter are in mutual trines.
•     Mars, Saturn, Venus and Mercury are in mutual trines.
•     All the planets are placed in four houses - sixth, seventh, tenth and eleventh.
Planetary Grid
From the rasi chakra and planetary grids we can summarise:
The Sun rules the ninth house and is placed in the seventh.

<<<PAGE 200>>>
The Moon rules the eighth house and is placed in the seventh.
Mars rules the fifth and twelfth houses and is placed in the tenth.
Mercury rules the seventh and tenth houses and is placed in the sixth.
Jupiter rules the first and fourth house and is placed in the eleventh.
Venus rules the sixth and eleventh houses and is placed in the sixth.
Saturn rules the second and third houses and is placed in the tenth.
The Rahu Ketu axis is placed in the seventh/first house axis.
We can also see that the number of planets placed in the different elements and modes are:
Elements    Modes
Water
0    Cardinal 1
Earth
4    Fixed  
2
Fire
1    Mutable  6
Air
4    
You will see that earth and air energy dominate Prince William’s chart. There is a complete
absence of water, which rules emotions and feelings. The modes are dominated by six planets in
mutable signs, which shows a changeable personality. His ascendant degree is in a fire sign.
Now we can fill in more of the picture by looking at the nakshatras:
......and the karmic axis:
Planets conjuncting Rahu - Sun and Moon
Planets conjuncting Ketu - None
