# source: _OceanofPDF.com_The_Essentials_Of_Vedic_Astrology_-_Komilla_Sutton.pdf
# pages: 126-165
# compiled into: nakshatras.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 126>>>
 
The Nakshatras
1. Ashwini
0º - 13º20' Aries
Ashwini’s symbol is the head of a horse
The ruling deity is the Ashwini Kumaras
The Sun exalted in Ashwini
It is ruled by Ketu
Ashwini, the first nakshatra, is ruled by Ketu and is in the sign of Aries. Kumara is a general
name for a boy, youth or prince. Aries deals with birth, a new life, freshness of approach and
start of a new cycle of life. Ashwini indicates the beginning of the soul’s journey into the earthly
life. Ketu, as the significator for moksha ruling the beginning of life (indicated by Aries), shows
that the true reason of our manifestation on earth is to find moksha - spiritual liberation and the
final release from the cycles of life and death. This is the stage where the mind is pure and we
have not yet entangled ourselves into knots which represent the attachments to life. The Sun, the
significator of the soul and our inner consciousness, is exalted in Ashwini.
Ketu acts like Mars, but on a psychological level, so the purity of Martian action, courage and
protection of humanity is powerfully indicated. The past life connection is very strong, specially
if the Moon is placed here, as Ketu is the planet that keeps the secrets of past lives.
The Ashwins were twin sons of the Sun God. They represent the transition from darkness to
light and herald a new dawn; a time when there is an intermingling of the dualities of day and
night, past life and present, heaven and earth. They are the celestial physicians who have great
healing powers. People born in Ashwini are great healers and they have the ability to prolong
life. It is creative power in its latency. They can be successful on both the material and spiritual
levels.
2. Bharani

<<<PAGE 127>>>
13º20' - 26º40' Aries
The symbol of Bharani is Yoni - the female sexual organ
The presiding deity is Yama - the god of death
Saturn is debilitated in Bharani
It is ruled by Venus
Bharani’s basic principle is Shakti, the passive female power. It is this energy that incubates the
soul and transports it from one realm of existence to another. Put another way it takes you from a
spiritual manifestation to a more objective one.
The symbol for Bharani is Yoni - the female reproductive organ; this establishes Bharani as a
channel for creation.
The ruling deity is Yama, the god of death, although this doesn’t just mean physical death. It
can mean the ending of one chapter of your life. Yama is also responsible for the seed of new
life. He allows us to detach ourselves from previous lives so that we can be reborn to create fresh
karma. In yoga practice, the disciplines of Yama (restraint) and Niyama (practice or observation)
are used to channel physical energies. Whichever interpretation you take for Yama, Bharani
directs the inner nature towards its highest intensity. The rulership of Bharani by Venus but
within the energy of Mars makes the action very much on a material plain. Bharani people
believe in excess; whether they are indulging in sex or doing yoga they do not know when to
stop. They are idealistic, which can sometimes be misinterpreted
Saturn, the planet of karmic restriction, is debilitated here. Saturn wants the soul to focus on
paying for its past karma. Bharani is about youthfulness, the opposite of Saturn’s nature. It is
also a brahamchari, which means a bachelor. The sexual nature of this nakshatra make it very
difficult for the brahamchari Saturn to deal with its impulses.
3. Krittika
26º40' Aries - 10º00' Taurus
The symbol of Krittika is a razor

<<<PAGE 128>>>
The presiding deity is Agni - the god of fire
The Moon is exalted in Krittika
It is ruled by the Sun
The first quarter of Krittika lies within Aries, ruled by Mars, and the other three-quarters in
Taurus, ruled by Venus. It is ruled by Sun. You will remember the myth of the Krittikas - their
role in the birth of Mars (and his ensuing destruction of the demon) links them to impossible
feats. Power and war are the two main attributes. It is a malefic nakshatra as it has the capacity to
nurture potentially destructive forces. Like a mother, Krittika has no choice regarding the seed
she carries; the mother does not know how her progeny will turn out.
The Venusian earthiness of Taurus and the Solar fire of Krittika make planets very fiery,
practical and sensuous. The Moon is exalted in Krittika at 3º Taurus. The mind, as signified by
the Moon, has both constructive and destructive impulses, so its exaltation here shows the ability
to control the destructive side of its nature.
Krittika has the capacity to create powerful people who are not afraid to confront difficult
situations. Planets in Krittika need to be guided towards their positive nature as there is always a
potential for destruction.
4. Rohini
10º00' - 23º20' Taurus
Its symbol is the chariot
The ruling deity is Brahma, the creator of the Universe
Rohini is ruled by the Moon
Rohini in Sanskrit means ‘red’, which relates to passion and sensuality. It is in the sign of Taurus
ruled by Venus, and the nakshatra is ruled by the Moon. The combination of Venus and the
Moon indicates great beauty, perfection, and a striving towards feminine essence. Rohini is
considered the favourite wife of the Moon. (According to mythology, the 27 Nakshatras are the
27 wives of the Moon* each of whom he stayed with for one day a month.) The other wives,
jealous of the Moon’s infatuation with Rohini, complained to Brahma, the creator, who cursed
the Moon to lose his power totally and then allowed him regain it - which in our terms has
become waxing and waning cycles. The Moon becoming infatuated with Rohini reflects the
soul’s entanglement with matter. It is here that he becomes involved with the earthly illusions
which directly lead to the of purity; here also is where and why the waxing and waning cycles of
life and death begin. It directs the soul towards the physical world with its pleasures and pains.
The Moon and Venus, which are essentially material planets, can become intensely involved in
Rohini’s pleasures and attractions. Brahma, the ruling deity of Rohini, is the creator of the

<<<PAGE 129>>>
universe, which further indicates that procreation and life on earth are part of the bigger picture
he has yet to reveal. At this stage he guides the soul into the first part of its involvement with the
world of senses, an experience that is essential to the growth of the soul.
*The Moon is often regarded as a male deity in the Vedas.
5. Mrigasira
23º20' Taurus - 6º40' Gemini
Its symbol is the head of a deer
The ruling deity is Soma
Mrigasira is ruled by Mars.
Mriga means a deer and Sira means head. The head of the deer is also a symbol of the Moon.
Mrigsira is situated half in Taurus (ruled by Venus) and half in Gemini (ruled by Mercury). It is
ruled by Mars - the planet of action and courage, which here aids the consciousness to move onto
a different level of manifestation. The splitting of Mrigasira between the creative and sensual
instincts of Taurus and the mental, intellectual activity of Gemini needs the Mars energy to move
towards individuality.
To understand the impact of Mrigasira, we need to refer to Tara’s Rahasya (secret) as told in
the Vedas. As you will remember, Tara was the wife of Jupiter and she had an affair the Moon
which resulted in the birth of Mercury. In the context of this nakshatra, the myth illustrates that
sense of dissatisfaction with the way things are - the desire to experience ‘something more’. The
intellect is considered to be just a fragment of the mind, so for it to be born there had to be a
merging of Tara’s godly impulses with the earthly impulses of the Moon - a duality which is
reflected in the quality of Mercury.
Mrigasira essentially shows the beginning of the search to live life on a different level, the
dissatisfaction with the present circumstances however good or pure they may seem. At
Mrigasira, the soul loses its inherent purity as its journey finally takes it into the realms of
worldliness.
6. Ardra

<<<PAGE 130>>>
6º40' - 20º00' Gemini
Its symbol is the head or the jewel
The ruling deity is Rudra - the god of destruction
Ardra is ruled by Rahu - the North Node
Ardra means green, moist. It is situated entirely in Gemini, ruled by Mercury. Ardra itself is
ruled by Rahu. This dual rulership of Rahu and Mercury explains the field of operation for
Ardra: Rahu as Vasuki drank the nectar which made him immortal, therefore as the ruler of
Ardra he wants to achieve the highest ambitions. Mercury indicates that the sphere of activity is
going to be intellectual. Rahu makes us want to achieve the impossible, reach for our highest
aspirations. The search here is for intellectual perfection.
The symbol of the jewels gives the ability to absorb kinetic, mystical and spiritual energies
from the Sun. Jewels are known to absorb energies around them and transmit them to the wearer.
In the same way, Ardra has the capacity to absorb these powers, using them for higher or lower
purposes.
The other symbol of Ardra is the head - obviously where the brain (and thus the mind) is
biologically situated. The brain is formed by experiences from the past karma, but the mind can
again work in either a positive or negative way. Ardra’s symbols therefore represent ideas and
the capacity to think.
The overall influence of Ardra indicates the duality of Gemini: the lust for immortality
represented by Rahu, the duality of the mind and intellect by Mercury. Both can be used to
enhance the world or destroy it. At the cosmic stage of Ardra, there is conflict on the outer level
where we are dissatisfied with our present surroundings and start looking for answers. This can
be through exploring and communicating with the occult.
Rudra, the god of destruction, is a form of Shiva and is the deity of Ardra. His mission is to
destroy ignorance, so he directs the consciousness towards knowledge and finding the answers
for ourselves about this manifestation. At Ardra we begin our studies in the Law of Nature. For
the first time we become dissatisfied with the materialistic nature of our lives and start towards
expanding the horizons of our spiritual selves.
7. Punarvasu

<<<PAGE 131>>>
20º00' Gemini - 3º20' Cancer
Its symbol is the Bow
The ruling deity is Aditi
Punarvarsu is ruled by Jupiter
Punarvasu is situated towards the end of Gemini. It has three quarters in Gemini ruled by the
Mercury and the final quarter in Cancer ruled by the Moon. The nakshatra itself is ruled by
Jupiter - the celestial guru who is there to guide us to our righteous path. Punarvasu deals with
the transfer of knowledge from the spiritual to the earthly, and Jupiter as the true teacher has the
responsibility to guide this process. The Gemini part of the nakshatra gives the duality of
purpose, the intellect being torn in two directions. The Cancer part of the nakshatra indicates
transferring the spiritual knowledge into its earthly domain.
Punar Vasu translates into Punah as ‘again’, and Vasu, meaning ‘brilliant’, like rays of light.
Punah also means to stay. The full meaning of the nakshatra is to live simultaneously at different
levels of cosmic manifestation. Punarvasu also relates to the Vasus, the Vedic deities of whom
there were eight: Apas, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhas. These
deities have a strong connection with the Sun and appear at different stages of manifestation to
guide the soul towards its true direction. They transform the messages from a higher realm into
ideas to guide us in earthly life; like the rays of light from the Sun which bring the divine
message to earth. Punar Vasu’s ruling deity is Aditi who is the female principle as well as the
representation of infinity.
The symbol of the bow indicates that this nakshatra is the link between the Archer and his
objective. The Archer is the man who needs the link of the bow/Punarvasu to achieve his
objective. Whether they are on a spiritual level or a material one, Punarvasu creates the situation
where you can prepare to reach for your goals.
8. Pushya
3º20' - 16º20' Cancer
The symbols are a flower, an arrow and a circle

<<<PAGE 132>>>
The ruling deity is Brihaspati
Jupiter exalted in Pushya
It is ruled by Saturn
Pushya is within the sign of Cancer (ruled by the Moon) and is ruled by Saturn. The word itself
means holy, pure and auspicious. Pushya’s presiding deity is Brihaspati, which is another name
for Jupiter, the advisor to the gods. It is an expansive planet, increasing everything it touches, but
Saturn, the planet that brings forth karmic restrictions is the ruler of the nakshatra; this dual
influence on Pushya is what makes it so special. A balance between expansion and restriction is
achieved under Pushya; the soul’s restrictions as well as its knowledge are fully expressed here.
At this stage, the soul understands that this life is but a part of the greater cycle, not the whole
thing in itself; there is a limited destiny to be experienced which is connected to the growth and
restrictions of this life. The soul matures through this incarnation.
The symbol of the flower (any flower) is usually the expression of latent faculties, the outward
expression of inner ideas. That of an arrow shows ambition and directed activity. The circle is
complete in itself; it focuses our attention on this lifetime in its entirety, not just the beginning or
the end of it.
Jupiter is exalted in Pushya. It deals with knowledge, teaching, advising and expansion on a
spiritual level and is placed in the nakshatra of its opposing force Saturn, which is tamasic and
very much concerned with worldly affairs. Jupiter’s exaltation here indicates that Saturnine
restrictions are necessary for wisdom to dawn, for the harnessing of knowledge and creating
strength.
9. Ashlesha
16º40' Cancer - 0º00' Leo
The symbol is the Serpent
Its presiding deity is the Nagas
Mars debilitated in Ashlesha
It is ruled by Mercury
Ashlesha is wholly in Cancer. The ending of Ashlesha and the ending of Cancer coincide - the
Lunar and the Solar zodiac meet here, which makes this nakshatra extremely powerful on a
spiritual level thus destiny plays an important part for those born in Ashlesha. Destiny is
something you cannot control, it is borne from your own actions in previous lives. Ashlesha
means alienation or discord. Here the soul separates itself from one level of manifestation to
move towards another. This can create discord in the material aspects of one’s life.
The ruler of Ashlesha is Mercury, which acts as the celestial bridge between higher forces and
the earth. It is also the intellect that guides our rational thinking and the ego, which makes us

<<<PAGE 133>>>
different from other animals; the Moon, the ruler of the sign, represents the mind which controls
us. Together these concentrate Ashlesha on the development of the mind and changes in the
human psyche. Mars, the planet of action, is debilitated in Ashlesha, so its natural urge to take
the initiative is somewhat dampened by the strongly psychic energies here.
The presiding deities of Ashlesha are the Nagas, snakes who have great occult powers. It
would be wrong to think of them as merely poisonous snakes that kill. Ashlesha people are
supposed to have incisive vision which enables them to look into the hidden secrets of nature and
understand true wisdom. The snake carries his poison in a pouch so it’s not actually in his body.
It will only use this poison when forced to do so. Also, just as poison can be used for healing or
for killing, so the Nagas have the capacity for both good or ill. Ashlesha can lead people to
knowledge, wisdom, wealth and prosperity but it can also take them down the path of danger,
self- destruction, sexual adventure and the unexpected. Snakes shed their skins periodically
which serves to remind us of the cycle of rebirth and transformation. Ashlesha being at the
junction of the Solar and Lunar zodiacs shows the ending of one cycle of life and the beginning
of another. This process of shedding old skin is always painful; it relates to a change of the mind
- emotional and intellectual and the evolving of human consciousness.
10. Magha
0º00' - 13º20' Leo
The symbol is a house or a palanquin
The presiding deity is Pitris - the forefathers
Magha is ruled by Ketu
Magha means mighty and great, and is the second nakshatra ruled by Ketu. It is in the sign of
Leo and ruled by the Sun, so it isn’t surprising that people born in this nakshatra aspire towards
greatness. Magha is the beginning of the second cycle in the soul’s journey; the signs Leo to
Scorpio indicate the soul’s full involvement in the pleasures and pains of earthly life. Ketu, as the
significator of spiritual realisation rules the starting point of the journey into matter, which shows
how important it is to experience the realities of life whilst still fulfilling the divine mission of
the soul.
Magha’s ruling deities are the Pitris, the fathers of humanity whose mission is to guide their
children onto the right path in life; they only interfere if you deviate. Ketu and Pitris both guide
the soul towards its special mission. Planets in Magha are idealistic even if their mission is to
fulfil materialistic needs; this can create misunderstanding amongst friends who may suspect
your honour and sincerity. Magha gives a lot materially, but the person ruled by Magha knows
intuitively that happiness is but an experience; he still needs to follow the inner purpose of life

<<<PAGE 134>>>
and move towards moksha.
The symbols of Magha are a palanquin and a house. The house is a synonym for the body, which
is the tool to carry out the spiritual mission in life. The palanquin is supported by a central rod
made from a bamboo pole; the central rod represents the spinal cord and the knots in the pole are
the chakra points; the people carrying the palanquin are the sense and action. This symbolism
gives clear direction to Magha that the senses have to be conquered; they become like the
servants carrying the palanquins and the chakras have to be activated to reach towards true
understanding. At this stage however the direction is being given but not necessarily the answers.
11. Purva Phalguni
13º20' - 26º40' Leo
The symbols are a bed, fireplace and platform
Its ruling deity is Bhaga - the Vedic god of luck
It is ruled by Venus
Purva and Uttara Phalguni are two parts of a whole nakshatra of four stars, and the constellation
resembles a bed. They indicate similar purposes with a very specific difference.
Purva Phalguni is entirely in the sign of Leo ruled by the Sun. It is ruled by Venus, which of
course rules the good things in life. Phalguni means the nakshatra which gives the fruit of our
endeavours and it has the capacity to fulfil our desires on a materialistic level. The Sun and
Venus combination gives abundant wealth and happiness. The Sun, representing the soul, takes
time out in this nakshatra to relax a bit, to allow itself to be distracted by the Venusian pleasures
of life.
The symbols of Purva Phalguni, the bed, the platform and the fireplace, are all places where
we take time off from the main focus of life to enjoy earthly pleasures. The Upanishads tell how
the people used to gather around the fire to listen to the tales of the gurus. This particular
nakshatra indicates where the soul rests from its purpose of finding salvation and enjoys its
Karma Phal, the fruits of its actions.
The ruling deity of Bhaga, the god of good fortune and luck, indicates that the fruits are
usually highly auspicious. Bhaga also represents a woman’s womb and procreation, as it is
considered good luck for a woman to be able to bear children. Naturally this is where the area of
life concerning children or creativity is very pronounced. Being a female nakshatra, Purva
Phalguni needs other dynamic energy to activate it.
12. Uttara Phalguni

<<<PAGE 135>>>
26º40' Leo - 10º00' Virgo
The symbol is four legs of the cot
The ruling deity is Aryaman
It is ruled by the Sun
Uttara Phalguni is the continuation of Purva Phalguni. It is the male energy to Purva’s female
and represents the other half of the picture. Uttara Phalguni is a quarter in Leo and three quarters
in Virgo; Leo is the sign for royalty, Virgo the sign for service, and these dramatically different
qualities are represented by the signs. Uttara Phalguni is ruled by the Sun - the ruler of the
universe, the significator of authority and power. The Sun signifies creation and carries within it
the knowledge of individual karma. Uttara Phalguni allows the soul to recognise its own failings
as well as restrictions imposed by its limited destiny in this life.
The four legs of the cot represent the sexual energy of the soul, the downward flow of the
power. Each of the legs represent the sheaths in which the soul becomes entangled - the physical,
the etheric, the astral and the mental. These sheaths surround the evolving soul during its stay in
the Phalgunis. There is realisation that we are nothing more than a fragment of the whole
universe, part of cosmic law; that our soul is rendered helpless in any attempt to reach for the sky
by its connection to the earthly incarnation, a servant to its lower desires.
Aryaman, the ruling deity of Uttara Phalguni is famous for his leadership qualities. As a
nakshatra it bestows those qualities on an incarnating soul as well as allowing it to recognise that
its ambitions are limited by the enormity of the task ahead. It gives courage in the face of
adversity, individual effort against all the odds. It creates isolation as one learns to shed the
constraints created by past karma.
13. Hasta
10º00' - 23º20' Virgo
The symbol is the hand or palm of the hand
The ruling deity is Savitar, the Sun God
Mercury is exalted in Hasta
It is ruled by Moon

<<<PAGE 136>>>
Hasta is ruled by the Moon and is placed entirely in the sign of Virgo (ruled by Mercury). The
Moon controls the mind and Mercury the intellect and ego, or the ahamkar, which develops
with the intellect. According to the Vedas, Mercury is the child of the Moon (read the myth in
the Mrigsira nakshatra); this nakshatra reflects the entire mind.
Its symbol is the palm of the hand, where the complete destiny of an individual is given. The
right and the left hands are positive and negative, male and female energies. The four fingers of
the hand show the four motivations - Artha, Kama, Dharma and Moksha, the three digits on the
fingers are the three gunas - Rajas, Tamas and Sattva. The four fingers are also the four
directions - North, South, East and West. The fingers and the thumbs show the five senses (sight,
hearing, taste, smell and touch) and the five elements (water, earth, sky, air and fire). The digits
on the four fingers show the twelve zodiac signs, and the digits of the thumbs and fingers are the
thirty days of the solar month. The hand reflects the solar system and its planets. To write about
all we can see from the hand is an entire field of knowledge - this all reflects the Hasta nakshatra.
Mercury is exalted here.
Hasta has the quality for the individual to change, to grow in different directions. It provides
immense opportunities for growth and expansion. The inner urge is to stride ahead but external
forces restrict progress so the result is conflict and crisis. Souls are guided towards nvritti marg
- renunciation, public service and becoming a sustaining power in the community.
The ruling deity of Hasta is Savitar which is a personification of the Sun, and therefore of the
soul. Savitar deals with the healing regenerative energies.
14. Chitra
23º20' Virgo - 6º40' Libra
The symbol is a pearl
The ruling deity is Tvashtar
Venus is debilitated here
It is ruled by Mars
Chitra means a picture, or worldly illusion, something beautiful. People with their Moon in
Chitra are usually very attractive and have a magnetic personality. It is placed half in Virgo,
ruled by Mercury and half in Libra, ruled by Venus. The nakshatra is ruled by Mars, the
significator for courage, action and leadership, but the combination of Mars and Mercury is a
difficult one so in the Virgo part of the nakshatra there are negative energies to be dealt with.
Chitra is a powerful nakshatra whose presiding deity, Tvashtar, is the celestial architect. The
prime impulse of Chitra is to transform, to cut away the layers that hide our true self. Mars in
such a powerful position will have tremendous capacity to break through barriers to give us what
we desire. It breaks through the intellectual barriers in Virgo and in the sensual ones in Libra. In
Chitra/Virgo, Venus is debilitated. Venus is the planet for love, romance, commitment, marriage,

<<<PAGE 137>>>
the luxuries of life, so the intellectual transformation which takes place in Chitra/Virgo becomes
difficult to deal with. Therefore it acts contrary to its natural impulses and becomes a
perfectionist and over-critical.
Chitra begins the process of unfolding the hidden nature of man. Tvashtar, the architect must
cut away the rough edges; it is never an easy process.
The Chitra individual will find itself in situations that force it to reform. The process is
painful: the ego has to be cut away so that the inner soul can break through. The symbol of the
pearl for Chitra reminds us that in the same way as the shell has to be broken for the shining
pearl to emerge - after many years of growth - so, after many lifetimes and many ordeals does the
true personality of the individual shine through. This breaking of the shell is a difficult process
and usually means an individual has to make immense changes over a long period to make
progress.
The hidden perfection of a pearl can only be externalised by great insight and courage to fight
and bear great ordeals. Mars does not accept defeat; any confrontation provides it with added
incentive to fight and attain its goal.
15. Swati
6º40' - 20º00' Libra
The symbol is coral
Its ruling deity is Vayu, the god of wind and life breath
The Sun is debilitated in Swati
It is ruled by Rahu
The second nakshatra ruled by Rahu is Swati, the name given to one of the wives of the Sun god.
Planets in Swati indicate the depth of the soul’s involvement in materialism and the indicator of
the soul in our chart, the Sun, is debilitated here. Under Swati, the impulse is material gain.
Venus rules the earthly needs in an individual; combining it with Rahu adds further to the desire
for success, wealth and finance. Many millionaires are born with their Moon in Swati.
The location of this nakshatra in Libra indicates that the experience of full involvement in
earthy, materialistic pleasures will bring with it dissatisfaction because the scales will be laden
on one side. Once success is achieved we feel empty, alone and dissatisfied with our
achievement. Many try for more success but the correct thing would be to look inwards. Libra is
the stage when we start to think about spiritual meaning but only once the other urges have been
fulfilled. The spirit is encased in outer physical sheaths, which restrict it, whilst further
enhancement depends upon the development of its inherent potential. Equilibrium is reached
when the tension of these opposing forces becomes equally balanced.

<<<PAGE 138>>>
The presiding deity is Vayu, which rules the material world along with Agni (fire) and Surya
(the Sun). Its area of operation is Prana - the life breath without which we would perish. Our
desires and the intellect are controlled by Vayu, which makes Swati essentially materialistic and
involved in mundane pursuits.
The symbol is coral which has a hard outer sheath but is self propagating. It lives in a marine
environment which it both affects and is affected by. This symbolises the human being, who
lives in the world which influences his life, but in turn the human being makes an impact on the
world around him.
16. Vishakha
20º00' Libra - 3º20' Scorpio
Its symbol is the potter’s wheel and the archway
The ruling deities are   :  Agni, the god of Fire
  
Indra, the god of gods
Saturn is exalted and the Moon debilitated in Vishakha
Vishakha is ruled by Jupiter
Vishakha is three quarters in the sign of Libra ruled by Venus and a quarter in the sign of
Scorpio ruled by Mars. Vishakha itself is ruled by Jupiter. Saturn is exalted in the Libra portion
and the Moon is debilitated at 3º Scorpio in the Scorpio part; this shows the great duality of this
nakshatra. Saturn’s exaltation forces the soul to learn from its experiences in life and change its
outlook. The Moon, which is the reflection of the soul and the significator of the mind, is
debilitated. The great churning of mind takes place in Vishakha between the lower self and its
higher aspirations. The Moon does not want to change and is happy with its earthly inclinations,
but at this stage of life, it is forced to recognise the ultimate purpose of life - moksha.
In the Libra part, Vishakha provides affluence, comfort and pleasant experiences in life. In
Scorpio, it is full of trials and tribulations.
Vishakha is the only nakshatra to have two ruling deities: Agni and Indra. Agni is fire, which
burns away all that is superfluous, while Indra enjoys sensual enjoyment and luxury. The two
opposing deities cause turmoil and stress.
The symbol of potter’s wheel shows the static inner core which is steeped in the tamas of
worldly illusions. The clay fashioned by the potter is likened to life, which is shaped in different
ways by the hands of destiny, the experiences of life help it to mature.
The archway represents the threshold of a new life. The change is yet to take place, as this is the
soul looking from outward to within. It has reached the point in life where there is a desire to go
towards the inner sanctum, the great unknown, which can bring up negative and positive issues.

<<<PAGE 139>>>
There is no guarantee of what awaits. Again, Jupiter, the advisor and teacher to the god as the
ruler of this nakshatra, is at hand to steer the soul from its earthly responsibilities to more
spiritual dimensions. (See Punarvasu nakshatra).
17. Anuradha
3º20' - 16º40' Scorpio
The symbol of Anuradha is a lotus
Its ruling deity is Mitra, the god of light
It is ruled by Saturn
Anuradha is placed entirely in the sign of Scorpio, ruled by Mars. The nakshatra is ruled by
Saturn. Mars gives us the courage and confidence to face the spiritual trials and tribulations that
are put in our path by Saturn. Mars wants to act and Saturn keeps bringing up karmic restrictions
which the soul is forced to overcome. Saturn is rigid and inflexible; it has a specific purpose and
will not allow anyone or anything to stand in the way of a karmic lesson. Mars is of course a
natural warrior who will fight any such restrictions. This causes a great deal of trauma until these
contrary energies are properly harnessed.
The symbol of Anuradha is the lotus which flourishes in stagnant waters and flowers in all its
beauty in mud. The seeds are cast in the mud and the flowers grow towards the solar energy.
Once the plant has flowered, it withers away and returns to the mud, where it will root again to
repeat the whole process. The lotus is said to flower so that it can be laid at the feet of the gods -
the soul is born so it breaks away from the process of life and death. These images together
illustrate the evolutionary aspect of the soul. It reaches to the Sun (universal consciousness) from
the mud (the soul concealed in matter) and the withering away shows death; rebirth is the process
of the rooting and re-flowering of the lotus.
Mitra, the ruling deity of Anuradha, is the god which rules daylight. Mitra means friends which
unites opposites. It unveils the experiences of the night. In Anuradha, it exposes the latent
potential that has become hidden by a life engulfed in materialism.
18. Jyeshta

<<<PAGE 140>>>
16º40' Scorpio - 0º00' Sagittarius
The symbol of Jyeshta is an umbrella and an earring
The ruling deity is Indra, the god of Gods
It is ruled by Mercury
The ending of Jyeshtha and the ending of Scorpio coincide - the Lunar and the Solar zodiac
meet. This is an extremely powerful junction because here the soul breaks away from its
materialistic course of life and moves towards the final part of the journey. The placement of the
Moon or the ascendant in the final parts of Jyeshta give a person a strong sense of destiny where
he has to struggle with his lower and higher desires. The ruler of Jyeshtha is Mercury, the
celestial link between materialism and spiritualism. At Jyeshta the change starts, and if the soul is
not ready, it struggles against the restrictions and creates unhappiness.
Jyeshta means elder sister, the middle finger or the holy river Ganges, and thus has some
esteem attached to it. The elder sister is looked upon with great respect as she is like one’s
mother. The river Ganges is said to wash away all our negative karma. The middle finger is the
finger of destiny and it is used in yoga during pranayama to control the flow of breath. At
Jyeshta we are given the guidance to activate the kundalini and the seven chakras. In order for
the kundalini to unfold, we have to master the lower nature; Jyeshta encourages us to master our
desires through the practice of yoga, austerity and meditation. The control over breath which we
undertake with pranayama is the ultimately control over life.
The earring and umbrella are status symbols. They are given to those who have passed tests of
life and achieved the wisdom and knowledge which others can look up to. The soul goes through
problems and difficulties on the material level so that it is ready for the initiation into higher
knowledge which is going to follow. Indra, the ruling deity controls the pleasures of life. He
achieved this status after hard toils and difficult lessons. It shows that at Jyeshta the soul
struggles to achieve the high esteem which will allow it to be privy to the secrets of the universe;
by gaining this knowledge it will then have the capacity to control the quality of its life.
19. Mula

<<<PAGE 141>>>
0º00' - 13º20' Sagittarius
Its symbol is the tail of a lion or an elephant’s goad
The ruling deity is Nritta
Mula is ruled by Ketu
Mula is the third nakshatra ruled by Ketu. In this final part of the soul’s mission it is searching
for a way to escape from the cycle of life and death. This is one of the most difficult nakshatras
for planets to be situated in, especially the Moon. The deity that rules Mula is Nittriti, the
goddess of death and destruction; she personifies the destruction of the material sheath and the
foundation on which spiritual enfoldment can be undertaken. The pain experienced by the
influence of Mula changes the personality. Attachment to the lower nature and material
tendencies have to be severed so that a new spiritual beginning is possible. This is the nakshatra
of initiation towards spiritual realisation. Ketu fulfils its role as Moksha karaka by arousing the
soul towards its ultimate destination. Mula means root and it also is Muladhara chakra (the base
chakra) where the kundalini power is activated.
The elephant’s goad is used to guide the elephant in the correct direction. In terms of people
this symbol represents the constant prodding or pain we have to suffer in our search for the
spiritual pathway.
The lion uses his tail to express his anger and supremacy. These show two opposite sides of
the Mula characteristic. There can be immense anger directed at others and power issues are
strong here. Jupiter as ruler of the sign represents wisdom and Ketu is the past karma which we
carry in the subconscious. If this is not being expressed or channelled properly, it can lead to
abuse of power.
20. Purvashadha
13º20' - 26º40' Sagittarius
The symbol is the elephant’s tusk
The presiding deity is Apas - the water god
Purvashadha is ruled by Venus
The nakshatra of Purvashada is in Sagittarius. Jupiter rules Sagittarius and the nakshatra ruler is
Venus. The focus is on Jupiterian wisdom, expansion of ideas and beneficence with the Venusian
idealism and justice. Both Jupiter and Venus are spiritual teachers. Venus advises the humans
and the demons, while Jupiter is guru to the gods, so the message here is to do things in the right
way. Purvashadha looks at universal issues and how we as individuals will deal with them. Purva
and Uttara Ashada are one half of a whole nakshatra. Purva means first, indicating it is the

<<<PAGE 142>>>
former part of the Ashadha nakshatras. Ashada means invincible, and this is the first nakshatra
where we recognise the invincibility of strength gained from wisdom.
Apas, the god of water, indicates the transforming nature of this nakshatra. Water is always
used in rituals to cleanse and rejuvenate the inner soul as it symbolises purity and is sattvic -
Ganga Jal or the water of the river Ganges is used on all auspicious occasions. At Purvaashada,
the soul wants to cleanse its sins to prepare for the final journey. The heightened sensitivity
which comes about from cleansing the outer karma is the most important condition of
transformation, and ushers in the dawn of spirituality.
Water is also changeable and represents emotions. Those born under Purvaashadha can be
unsettled, suddenly shifting the direction of their life. This makes them difficult to understand
and partnerships with them can be tough because of their apparently fickle nature.
The symbol of the elephant’s tusk shows the revelation of the inner faculties. The tusk is the
most expensive part of the elephant, valued so much for its beauty that the elephant is killed for
the sake of it. The knowledge which Purvaashadha uncovers is also valued by others but it can
lead demonic forces trying to take away this new power. The elephant lives in constant danger of
losing his most valuable asset; a person seeking his higher self has to face dangers from the
world around him in pursuit of his chosen path. The tusk, if cut off, will grow again, showing
that wisdom once gained cannot be taken away.
21. Uttarashadha
26º40' Sagittarius - 10º00' Capricorn
The symbol is the planks of a bed
The ruling deity are the Vishwedevas - the universal gods
Uttarashadha is ruled by the Sun
This is the second half of the Ashadas; Uttara means higher. The first quarter of Uttara Ashadha
is in Sagittarius, ruled by Jupiter, and the remainder is in Capricorn, ruled by Saturn. Uttara
Ashadha itself is ruled by the Sun. Consciousness is signified by the Sun and the combined
influence of Saturn and Jupiter moves it in a wholly different direction. Jupiter teaches wisdom
through knowledge while Saturn teaches knowledge through experience of life. They both guide
us - one by expanding our intellectual horizons and the other by bringing about restrictions
which lead ultimately to self-knowledge. The planks of the bed, the symbol of Uttarashadha, do
not just indicate a place for sleeping and resting. The planks indicate an austere bed, not one of
comfort. Sleep is a necessary requirement to open our minds to higher connections; rest is used
in yoga to relax the muscles so that the next asana can be taken slightly further. In the same way,
Uttarashadha creates conditions for the relaxation of the body so that the mind can move further
along its path of enlightenment.
Jupiter, the planet of knowledge and wisdom, is debilitated here in the Capricorn part of

<<<PAGE 143>>>
Uttarashadha. New wisdom here has to be through life experiences, and Jupiter is no use in
avoiding the harsh realities of karma.
The ruling deities the Vishwedevas, the universal gods, show that Uttarashadha has to
concentrate on worldly issues. It shows a life lived in public with an inner desire to be alone. The
Vishwedevas guide us towards social interaction but the inner self has to be detached. The
responsibility of our past karmas have to be completed before we can move on to the final level
of manifestation.
22. Shravana
10º00' - 23º20' Capricorn
The symbols are an ear and an arrow
The ruling deity is Vishnu, the preserver of the Universe
It is ruled by the Moon
Shravana is ruled by the Moon and the nakshatra is placed in Capricorn which has the rulership
of Saturn. This Saturn/Moon combination makes for difficult situations. The Moon waxes and
wanes, is emotional and changeable, Saturn is disciplined, rigid and inflexible. Saturn will teach
us to control our emotions, be detached from the up and downs of life. Shravana forces us to take
more responsibility for ourselves as we experience inner growth and move towards higher
knowledge.
Shravana means listening and this is the nakshatra of total silence. To listen to the sounds of
silence can only be done through self-discipline, yoga and the path of truth. This silence
develops in us the ability to see through the illusions of life. The Moon in this nakshatra echoes
the need for quietness and reflection. The silence that this total meditation brings in our hearts
will lead to a better understanding within ourselves; to sit in silence we have to like ourselves; it
forces us to recognise our own truths and not simply hide within the cacophony of life.
The symbol of the ear assigned to Shravana further enhances the listening quality. To hear the
various sounds and know how to listen will bring you the essence of what you are hearing and
learning. To listen is to learn.
Vishnu, the ruling deity supports the soul through its difficulties and tribulations as it matures.
It teaches a person to distinguish between fact and fiction in life.
23. Dhanishta

<<<PAGE 144>>>
23º20' Capricorn - 6º40' Aquarius
The symbol is the drum
The ruling deities are the Eight Vasus
Dhanishta is ruled by Mars
Dhanishta is placed half in Capricorn and half in Aquarius. Both are ruled by Saturn,
representing restriction, but Dhanishta is ruled by the opposing energy Mars - which of course
stands for bravery and action. When Mars and Saturn conjoin, it is usually considered a warlike
formation. The war in this case is being fought between the material and the spiritual self. Saturn
brings forth situations that enable past karma to be cleansed. Mars wants to break through
spiritual barriers but Saturn restricts it because there are still areas of life to perfect before
spiritual liberation can be achieved.
Dhanishta means a flute or a drum. Here it means the flute of Krishna or the drum of Shiva.
The symbol of the drum implies it is beating to the rhythm of someone else - others are to play
their song through this drum. It is essentially a lonely existence from a very early age. This can
mean that you are fulfilling other people’s expectations rather than your own. Both the drum and
the flute are hollow from within; this means an emptiness within the Dhanishta person unless he
finds something to fill it. Sometimes this can be fruitless chasing of dreams or illusions.
Dhanishta shows musical talent.
Vasus are the eight personifications of the Sun and are known as Apas, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara,
Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhas. These deities have a strong connection with the Sun and
appear at different stages of manifestation to guide the soul towards its true direction.
24. Shatabhishak
6º40' - 20º00' Aquarius
The quarters are ruled by Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and Jupiter
The symbols for Shatabhishak are a horse or a thousand flowers
Its ruling Deity is Varuna

<<<PAGE 145>>>
It is ruled by Rahu
Shatabishak is entirely in the sign of Aquarius, ruled by Saturn. Rahu’s rulership makes a very
difficult combination where life has to have a purpose and the total direction is about learning
lessons. Rahu gives results like Saturn but on a psychological level. This double Saturnine
influence on planets placed here is difficult to handle unless our activities are directed towards
service to humanity. Here both Rahu and Saturn are concerned with changing our life’s purpose,
giving us the final answers. Rahu on the internal level and Saturn on an external level offers
restrictions, obstacles and transformation. The need to understand the final lessons of life as well
as responsibility to others are two of the important aspects of Shatabishak.
Its symbol is the thousand petalled flower; Shatabishak is where the kundalini flowers and we
reach towards the full awareness of our consciousness. This is the stage in life where we activate
the Sahasara (Crown) chakra and Rahu brings forth its full power as the teacher of cosmic law.
When the Moon is in Shatabishak its materialistic tendencies are shed completely and we move
towards the next phase of spiritual development. Shat means a hundred and Bhishak means
formidable, intimidating; together they indicate steep learning curves to be undergone by the soul
in pursuit of its ultimate destiny.
The presiding deity, Varuna, bestows knowledge and wisdom on the person so that a ray of
light shines through him. The ray of light is the perception of why we are here, the real purpose
of the soul. This light guides the person under the direction of Varuna towards a new approach to
life.
25. Purva Bhadra
20º00' Aquarius - 3º20' Pisces
The symbol is the sword
Its presiding deity is Aja Ekapada
Purva Bhadra is ruled by Jupiter
Purva Bhadra is three quarters in Aquarius, ruled by Saturn and a quarter in Pisces, ruled by
Jupiter. The nakshatra is also ruled by Jupiter. Aquarius is the beginning, the dawn of new
consciousness within ourselves and on the world stage. It stands for purification - transformation
is a key word. Discarding the old life, so that new realities can emerge. Aquarius is ruled by
Saturn, Purva Bhadra is ruled by Jupiter. Saturn transforms consciousness through restrictions,
structures and obstacles whereas Jupiter expands and pushes through new frontiers. The
mingling of the contrary energies of the two rulers brings about far-reaching changes in the
individual psyche. At Pisces, it is the stage of merging individual consciousness with the
universal one. Purva Bhadra stands for stability, courage and change. Idealism is the essence of

<<<PAGE 146>>>
this nakshatra. It wants to change the world, to merge with the cosmic ocean of eternity, and to
fight for a cause regardless of the consequences.
Purva Bhadra and Uttara Bhadra are also different parts of the same nakshatra. Purva again
means first and Bhadra means auspicious and blessed.
The ruling deity Aja Ekapada represents the unborn cosmic energy - where the seeds are being
sown for the next stage in our evolution.
The symbol of the sword shows an instrument which can be used to attack as well as to
defend. The sword cuts through any restrictions, but also symbolises a fight for universal causes.
26. Uttara Bhadra
3º20' - 16º40' Pisces
The symbol is twins
The ruling Deity is Ahir Budhyana
It is ruled by Saturn
Uttara Bhadra is in Pisces, which is ruled by Jupiter, but the nakshatra is ruled by Saturn. Saturn
is linked to resistance, difficulties and opposition in the beginning but harmony by the end.
Jupiter is the only planet which can balance the Saturnine energies (see Pushya Nakshatra). This
nakshatra becomes very powerful when associated with any planet. Although it is passive and
non-active, it is also highly dynamic when influenced by an active force. It enables an individual
to comprehend wisdom concealed in different forms of manifestation. Whatever happens to the
individual there is growth and expansion of consciousness. There is opportunity to preserve,
protect and co-operate with the divine plan despite hardships. Mercury is debilitated here. It
represents the search of an individual in the material realms and signifies intellect and
individuality. At Uttara Bhadra, the individual voluntarily gives up both his personality and his
ego to merge with universal consciousness.
Ahir Budhyana, its ruling deity, is the god associated with water and darkness. The passivity
of darkness is the mysterious source from which all forms of creation have arisen. It signifies the
merging of consciousness into the deep sea of eternity. Ahir Bhudiyana is also a serpent which
represents wisdom; the snake sheds its skin showing the rebirth and cycles of life a soul passes
through during its journey (see Ashlesha nakshatra).
27. Revati

<<<PAGE 147>>>
16º40' - 30º00' Pisces
The symbol is a fish
The ruling deity is Pushan
Revati is ruled by Mercury
Revati links the beginning with the end; Rev means to go, move, and Ati to go beyond,
transcend. Together they mean transcending from one manifestation to another. Both the Solar
and Lunar zodiac end here with the last nakshatra. Having an ascendant or the Moon placed in
Revati indicates a soul who has to experience a very intense incarnation in this life. Events
happen which are directly linked to the destiny of the soul in ending one cycle of manifestation
and preparing for a new one; it is where the seeds are sown for fruition at a later date. Revati is
ruled by the celestial messenger, Mercury, and its ruling deity is Pushan, which is another name
for the Sun. The Sun nourishes the earth and as Pushan he also measures the skies, which means
that he is privy to the ultimate truths. Being the last nakshatra of the zodiac, Revati is powerful in
realising the ultimate truths about us; life, death, transformation, change - all come under the
premise of this fixed star.
Venus is exalted in the last part of Revati. It symbolises sex and procreation, and Venus being
at its most powerful here means that life is not all about endings. A seed is sown at this juncture
for future growth.
The symbol of the fish is auspicious because it represents procreation and creativity.

<<<PAGE 148>>>
Vimshottari Dashas - The System of Prediction
The vimshottari dasha is the planetary system of predicting events in our life, and it is unique to
Vedic astrology. Vimshottari means ‘120’ - the optimum life-span in the era in which the Vedas
were written; dasha means ‘direction’. Originating in the era when the Vedas were written, the
system assumes an average life-span of 120 years! Those 120 years are divided into various
phases, controlled by the nine planets: the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus,
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu. Moving out of one phase into another involves a change of life direction.
Whilst the birth chart suggests the passive influences you have brought with you, and the past
life karmic issues that form part of your character, it is the dasha system that indicates when
these issues will become prominent. On analysis of your chart, you will be aware that certain
areas of life will run smoothly, whilst others will prove troublesome; understanding your dasha
pattern will help you to anticipate them and act accordingly. The usual questions of marriage,
children, career, and house moves can all be given timings in this way.
The Dasha Patterns
The dasha pattern shows which planets will be ruling at particular times in your life; they fulfil
three roles in the dasha periods:
•     They will act according to their own energies
•     Their role as rulers of the houses: the Sun and Moon rule one sign each, therefore they will
rule one house each. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn rule two signs - therefore
two houses each
•     Their role as karakas or significators (Sun - father; Jupiter - teacher etc.)
Sometimes the planetary placements in your chart are echoed by the dasha pattern, so you could
be working on one issue for many years: for example a 19 year dasha of Saturn placed in the
seventh house followed by a 17 year dasha of Mercury which rules the seventh house. It could
also be that you have strong yogas, but the main dashas don’t reflect the planets which form
them. Maybe you have a strong chart but only experience the effects during sub- and sub-sub
dashas. The dasha phases occur in the following order, and last for specific periods:

<<<PAGE 149>>>
The Sun
6 years
The Moon    10 years
Mars
7 years
Rahu
18 years
Jupiter
16 years
Saturn
19 years
Mercury
17 years
Ketu
7 years
Venus
20 years
All of the information you are about to compile is available on computer software or by ordering
it from the sources at the end of this book, but for those of you who would like to work it out for
yourselves here it is:
The first dasha in the cycle is decided by the position of your natal Moon, and to work out
your dasha pattern you need to find out the dasha period you were born into. We’ll follow
through an example, using the Moon at 8o 5' Leo. Looking at the Vimshottari Dasha by
Longitude of the Moon Table, we see that the column on the far left lists the longitude of the
Moon for Aries, Leo and Sagittarius and starts with the Ketu dasha: the closest degree to our
example is 8o - showing as 2 years 9 months and 18 days remaining of the Ketu dasha. However,
we still have 5' to account for, so looking at the smaller grid (Proportional Parts) we see that 5'
in the Ketu column is equal to 16 days. This amount must be deducted from the time remaining:
this leaves 2 years, 9 months and 2 days of Ketu dasha left at the time of birth. (Note that if the
closest value to your Moon degree on the Vimshottari chart was larger - rather than smaller as in
our example - you would add the amount shown in the proportional amounts table.)
Now you can work out your entire cycle and the dates that the new dasha periods will begin,
as they always follow the same pattern. As the list on the previous page shows, the Ketu dasha is
followed by Venus, so the person in our example will move into their Venus dasha at 2 years, 9
months and 2 days of age; a period that will last for twenty years and be followed by a six year
Sun dasha. Use this table to work out your own pattern, starting with your birth dasha against the
first row and continuing down through the dasha cycle until you have dates or ages for every
period.

<<<PAGE 150>>>
The first, third, fifth and seventh dashas are supposedly the more difficult times. Indian
astrologers would also use this pattern to look at longevity. Childhood death is reflected by the
first dasha; the length of a short life-span is indicated in the third dasha; a medium one in the
fifth and a long one in the seventh. However, this is only a broad outline and many other factors
are taken into consideration.
Vimshottari Dasha by Longitude of the Moon

<<<PAGE 151>>>
Vimshottari Dasha by Longitude of the Moon

<<<PAGE 152>>>
Proportional Parts
Antar dasha table

<<<PAGE 153>>>
The First Dasha
The first dasha of your life indicates what you will experience later on and it is the most
important dasha to study. It shows the connection between this incarnation and your previous
lives. You will need to study the house position of the first dasha ruler; a planet ruling the
dusthana houses (6, 8 or 12) shows that you may face difficulties on the more mundane level
which will focus your energies in a different spiritual direction. Next check the navamsha
position of your dasha ruler; this will indicate the inner quality of the dasha and which issues are
likely to dominate. What is the strength of the planet in the navamsha chart?
Finally and most importantly: look at the nakshatra for the position of the dasha ruler.
Studying the deeper subtleties of the nakshatra will help you to understand your soul’s purpose
in this incarnation. Here again you need to see the relationship between your first dasha ruler and
its nakshatra dispositor.
Antar Dashas or Bhuktis
We’ve now considered the maha dashas, the major dasha phases in some detail. To further
clarify the picture in terms of when events are likely to occur we also need to study the antar
dasha or bhuktis: each maha dasha has nine subdivisions called antar dasha. There are further
divisions from this point but we won’t be covering them in this book.
The first antardasha is ruled by the planet whose maha dasha it is: in a Jupiter maha dasha, the
first antar dasha will be ruled by Jupiter, the next by Saturn, the third by Mercury and so on as in
the list we’ve already seen. Using the previous example we’ll work out the sub-dasha at the time
of birth - this person was born with 2 years 9 months and 2 days remaining of a Ketu dasha.
Looking at the antar dasha table in the Ketu section, we see that the Ketu cycle is seven years, so
deduct one from the other, leaving 4 years, 2 months and 28 days. This value is greater than the
end of the Rahu period shown in the table (3 - 11 - 18) but less than the end of the Jupiter (4 - 10
- 24) so the sub-dasha will be Jupiter; the next period will be Ketu-Saturn then Ketu-Mercury to

<<<PAGE 154>>>
the end of the dasha, which then changes to Venus maha dasha. During the whole period of a
Ketu maha dasha, Ketu itself will be the major influence, but the planets involved in the different
antar- dasha sub-phases will add their influence as well, helpful or not.
It’s important to analyse the relationship between the rulers of the dasha and antardasha at the
time of birth: are they friends, enemies or neutral with each other ? If the two were enemies it
would show an inner conflict that would affect you throughout your life. On the other hand,
friends would give you a good start and to some extent smooth the way ahead.
Key points in Judging the Dashas
Unlike in the times of the Vedas, nowadays very few people live through all nine dashas! Most
of us have to be content with six or perhaps seven in a lifetime. The planet that rules your current
maha dasha is a major influence on your life throughout this phase. If you are working with
clients, the current maha dasha is a good place to begin an assessment of their present situation.
Keep these important points in mind when considering your current maha dasha ruler:
•    What is the graha’s nature and purpose - and is it benefic or malefic in your
natal chart?
Each graha has its own purpose, and during its maha dasha that purpose will be an important
motivation in your life. During your Saturn maha dasha you will experience the restrictions
inherent in your karma. Saturn’s maha dasha is also known as the one where you work hard! But
Venus’ purpose is to enjoy. Jupiter’s is ‘the getting of wisdom’ - things come easier during its
maha dasha and you may not have to work as hard as usual to get the same results. During the
Sun’s maha dasha your soul begins a new phase; issues of authority may arise. Mercury is very
changeable; its maha dasha may see you tackling life’s practicalities (it might be a good time for
people in business) or learning new skills.
The current maha dasha will affect your life differently according to whether its ruler’s influence
tends to the benefic or to the malefic in your natal chart. For example, in principle Saturn and
Mercury are friends; but what relationship if any do they have in your natal chart? It is this
specific relationship you will experience during your Saturn Mercury dasha.
•    Which houses does it rule?
The grahas will rule different natal houses according to your rising sign, so Saturn dasha and
Mercury antar dasha will mean different things to different people. For example: if your lagna
was in Taurus, Saturn will rule your auspicious ninth and tenth houses while Mercury will rule
the second house (wealth) and the fifth (creativity). Saturn-Mercury, therefore, will bring
excellent results. However, if your lagna is in Cancer, Saturn will rule your seventh and eighth
houses and Mercury the third and twelfth, so Saturn-Mercury will be a period of difficulty.
Look at the house position of the ruler of your current maha dasha. In general is its house
placement weak or strong and is it in its own house? Which graha rules the house and is it friend
or foe? These considerations can influence whether the dasha will be straightforward or
traumatic for you.
•    What is the ruler’s position in your natal chart?
During a Saturn Mercury phase, the natal sign and natal house Saturn and Mercury are placed in
will become important. If both planets are exalted in your natal chart (Saturn in Libra, Mercury
in Virgo) you will experience Saturn-Mercury very differently from the way you would if they

<<<PAGE 155>>>
were debilitated (Saturn in Aries, Mercury in Pisces). Similarly, if Saturn and Mercury are well-
placed by house (Saturn in the third, sixth, tenth or eleventh houses, Mercury in the first, fifth,
ninth and tenth houses) you will experience Saturn-Mercury more easily than if they are poorly
placed (Mercury in the eighth house, Saturn in the fourth). If Saturn is in the fourth house in your
natal chart, happiness, your home, your private self will be the primary concerns, but with
Mercury in your eighth house these areas will be a difficult feature of your Saturn-Mercury
dasha phase.
•    Relative placements from each other and the signs they rule
Grahas placed in the sixth, eighth or twelfth houses from the signs they rule will be difficult
during their maha dasha phase. Taking our Saturn-Mercury example again: if Saturn was in Leo
it would be in the eighth house from its own sign of Capricorn, and so would create problems in
whichever house was ruled by Capricorn in your natal chart.
If Mercury in Libra was in the fifth house from its own sign of Gemini, it would enhance the
prospects of the house ruled by Gemini in the natal chart. Virgo would be in the twelfth house
from it however, so some difficult issues might arise there. Also if Saturn was in Scorpio and
Mercury in Aries, Mercury would be in the sixth house from Saturn; this is a difficult position
for them. But if instead Saturn was in Taurus and Mercury in Virgo, Mercury would be in the
fifth house from Saturn and would produce a great antar dasha; they would be in trikona from
each other.
•    What relationships does it have with other planets in your natal chart?
The ruler of your current maha dasha will interact with all the grahas in your natal chart, so if it
has a difficult relationship with any particular graha, when that planet’s antar dasha comes along
you are likely to experience a period of difficulty. Here’s a reminder of the ‘friends and enemies’
list.
Saturn is friends and works well with
Venus, Mercury and Rahu
Saturn is the enemy of and works badly with
Jupiter, Sun, Moon and Mars
The Saturn-Mercury of our example in this section should be an easier phase than, say Saturn-
Jupiter or Saturn-Sun.
The kind of problems that will arise when your maha dasha and antar dasha rulers are not
friendly will be indicated by the natal house or houses ruled by the ruler of the antar dasha.
The Nakshatras of the Dasha Rulers
Understanding the nakshatras of your dasha rulers is the key to the subtle analysis of your
dashas. The relationship between the dasha ruler and the nakshatra dispositor (friends, enemies
or neutral) will show whether you are happy or in conflict with the energies indicated by the
nakshatra; also, each one has its own energy, direction, deities and rulers, which give further
clues as to how it will manifest in your life.
Some of the nakshatras are ruled by Rahu (Ardra, Swati and Shatabhishak) and Ketu
(Ashwini, Magha and Mula). During the dashas of planets placed in the Ketu nakshatras the
karmic aspects are further highlighted (see chapter on the Karmic Axis); there is often an
accentuated feeling of striving for spiritual salvation and on a practical level, the desire to give

<<<PAGE 156>>>
up everything and move on. During dashas of the planets placed in the Rahu nakshatras you are
likely to become ambitious, dissatisfied and feel the need to explore beyond established
boundaries. This will again be on the mental plane and therefore difficult to pinpoint. Studying
the nakshatras involved and the relationships between Rahu and Ketu and the planets will help
you to get the most out of these particular dashas.
Interpreting the dashas
The Sun Dasha
The Sun dasha is connected to your self, personal ambitions, father, authority and your soul.
Look at where your sun is placed and which house it rules. The house it is placed in will indicate
the focus of your life; obviously there will be a different emphasis if the Sun is placed in the
tenth house of career rather than in the seventh house of relationships.
If the Sun is exalted (Aries), you can expect to have a wonderful dasha. But beware here, an
exalted Sun sometimes rest on its laurels, ready to bask in glory and not willing to get work
done. You may find that you are not making any effort on your own behalf. A debilitated Sun
dasha (Libra) can be a time where you are looking for inner light. It may highlight lack of
confidence and vitality. You will have to work with it. If the Sun is placed in an enemy’s house,
you may find your hopes and dreams in conflict with your vocation. In a friend’s house, the Sun
would be comfortable and dasha is likely to be positive.
On a subtle level, we look at the nakshatra of the Sun, which gives a further indication of the
effects of the Sun dasha. Always check the relationship of the Sun with the ruler of its nakshatra.
Moon Dasha
All the familiar lunar issues will be highlighted for you during the Moon dasha. You should try
to keep in touch with the phases of the Moon, because as it waxes and wanes, you may find
yourself picking up these traits - being changeable, fickle and unable to make up your mind. Also
as the Moon is a passive planet needing the Sun’s light, it will be a time when you need other
people’s energy to get you motivated. The Moon is fast moving and it signifies activity, so
during a Moon dasha it important for you to keep moving. The Moon’s passage through the
different nakshatras will also be pertinent; now would be a good time to make use of the tarabala
table in the Gochara chapter.
If the Moon in your chart is exalted, you can expect a wonderful time during its dasha. Check
its strength - a full, waxing Moon which is exalted will have different impact in its dasha than a
new or waning exalted Moon. A debilitated Moon dasha can create intense emotion, in which
case you need to try and stay positive. As an example, a Scorpio Moon would want to use this
time to explore the deeper aspects of life and here again you would check the phase and strength
of the Moon.
The Moon in an enemy’s house usually will create unsettled conditions, unless you learn to
deal with them, while in a friend’s house can be very sensual and pleasure-seeking which will be
reflected in its dasha.
Mars Dasha
Mars is the planet of action so its dasha will coincide with a lot of coming and going. Courage,
impulsiveness, passion, action-orientated activities will surface. You will need to be careful you
do not become over-dominating and aggressive; keep yourself occupied. The greatest problem
that Mars can face is inactivity. With a Mars dasha the temptation is to take on too much; temper

<<<PAGE 157>>>
could also be a problem. The end of a Mars dasha is usually difficult as it is moving towards the
Rahu dasha. One should always treat this period with caution and patience.
If Mars is exalted, it will reinforce your ambitions and the ability to be a leader. This will
focus your energy in a specific direction. A strong Mars can be too aggressive and will attempt to
control others. Mars in debilitation will diffuse your energy, but this is not necessarily negative;
just make sure you don’t race around wasting energy. Mars in an enemy house could be
uncomfortable time because of anger or frustration. Mars in its own house will be positive. In
Aries the spirit of adventure tinged with idealism will be strong. In Scorpio, it will seek its higher
spiritual life direction.
The relationship between Mars and its nakshatra ruler is of vital importance. The nakshatra
itself will guide your spiritual direction but the relationship between the two will show whether
you are comfortable with it or not. For example, if Mars is placed in any of the nakshatras ruled
by Saturn (Pushya, Anuradha and Uttarabhadra pada), then during its dasha you will feel a
conflict at the deepest level concerning the events of the period.
Mercury Dasha
Mercury is the planet of intellect and reasoning. It is essentially a planet which seeks reasons for
the life we are experiencing now. It is a time for reasoned debate and expansion intellectually.
Mercury is very changeable and therefore will naturally reflect its temperament in the form of
you changing your mind frequently! A Mercury dasha leads to greater freedom of expression,
especially coming after 19 years of the restrictive Saturn dasha.
If Mercury is exalted, it will make for a strong intellect which is very rational and focused.
Mercury in debilitation will cause you to react emotionally, leading to mood swings and the
knowledge that you are not thinking things through logically. A debilitated Mercury in its dasha
can also indicate a tendency to depression and lack of mental stability.
Mercury in an enemy’s house you can expect some internal conflict. Mercury in its own house
will be positive. In Gemini, sometimes you find yourself doing two jobs, following two
vocations in life and feeling very comfortable with it.
As before, study the nakshatra Mercury occupies and the relationship with its ruler to understand
the deeper meaning of the dasha.
Jupiter Dasha
Jupiter rules all good things in life and during it dasha you will find expansion and happiness. If
Jupiter is not a good planet for you, there may be the temptation to take unnecessary risks, which
can create problems. The feel-good factor during a Jupiter dasha is strong and sometimes you
take the easy way out; consequently you may find you haven’t achieved much by the end of it.
Jupiter is the karaka of sons, your husband, wealth, gurus and teaching, so all these aspects
will be highlighted. A Jupiter dasha/antar dasha will usually be the time you have children, get
married or meet the love of your life (for women only).
If Jupiter is exalted, you are sure to be granted your desires - this period will be full of
promise. Marriage, children, happiness can all be predicted. Jupiter in debilitation shows a strong
inclination towards financial gains and practical rather than spiritual life direction. Here you may
well meet a partner who is not so spiritually connected. Jupiter in an enemy’s house will not be
completely happy, so the dasha may not bring the bountiful results you expect. In this case it can
lead you in the wrong direction or make errors of judgment. Jupiter in its own sign will give very
good results. In Sagittarius, the focus will be towards teaching, growing from within, becoming
recognised as an authority. In Pisces, there is a more profound aspect to Jupiter. Here the desire

<<<PAGE 158>>>
will be to merge with the eternal; in practical terms that means having an idealistic way of
looking at life.
Venus Dasha
Venus rules the fine things in life like beauty, music, dance, pleasures, jewellery and finances
and during its dasha you are likely to be attracted by any of them. Marriage is quite possible in
this dasha. It strengthens existing relationships and shows just how much we want quality in our
lives; Venus desires the best and it is here that we seek it. Try to remember throughout this dasha
that, as in the mythological story, Venus can satisfy our material needs but it does not promise
happiness.
If Venus is exalted, expect a wonderful Venus dasha. All your material desires will be granted. It
is a time for success. Venus in debilitation shows a difficult period in your relationships. For
men, this could be a trying time with your wife, or you may find yourself being over critical with
others. Venus in an enemy’s house will not be totally happy, so during its dasha you may get into
a relationship which creates conflict either within yourself or with others. Financially, you may
be making money from something you are not totally happy with. Venus in its own sign will give
very good results. In Taurus, the focus will be towards more practical desires. Hard work,
practical financial considerations and indulging your passions will be very strong. Passions can
be for money, relationships, women, food and anything you relate to good times. This will be a
good dasha where achievement from own efforts is also indicated.
Saturn Dasha
Saturn is regarded as the most difficult dasha. Here it is important to remember that it can be
your greatest friend if you understand its dictates. With a bit of discipline a Saturn dasha can be
very positive; it can give rewards which are long-lasting and permanent but only to those who
work for them. A Saturn dasha during childhood can be tough as its lessons are difficult to deal
with at a young age. If Saturn is in exaltation, it will give you excellent results. You will be
naturally hard-working and responsible, but if it is debilitated, it will be a battle to achieve
anything. The dasha can be one where you will find yourself acting contrary to the Saturnine
restrictions and this can create problems.
Saturn in an enemy sign will make it hard for you to understand its power. It can lead to a
difficult dasha which will need wisdom and patience to deal with. Saturn here can also create
problems with health. In its own house it gives a strong sense of duty. In Capricorn, the approach
will be pragmatic whereas in Aquarius you will be trying to sublimate your own needs and work
for others.
Rahu Dasha
The effects of a Rahu dasha largely depend on its dispositor and the house placement. Rahu is
always about experiencing life. During this dasha you must consciously try to control your
ambitions; Rahu recognises no boundaries so it can create unrealistic expectations which are be
frustrating if you can’t achieve them. Rahu is the mouth of the snake so its venom is felt at the
beginning of the dasha. I find the beginning and end of a Rahu dasha have to be handled with
care when karmic influences dominate; how it will play out later in your life becomes difficult to
judge.
During a Rahu dasha you also have a sub-dasha of Ketu. Here the karmic axis of your life
becomes activated you can progress spiritually; its revelations can lead to the discovery of your
spiritual self, thus changing the whole course of your life. It can also help you to recognise

<<<PAGE 159>>>
karmic limitations or become aware of your destiny.
Ketu Dasha
Ketu differs from Rahu here as you feel like giving up things rather than experiencing them. You
may feel like changing jobs, giving up your old lifestyle or even moving into a retreat. Most
people experience very powerful life issues over which they have no control. A Ketu dasha will
lead to a spiritualising process, the soul is ready for it; there can also be immense success. It’s
important to realise though, that the end of the dasha usually takes away whatever has been given
at the beginning; as always, check which houses are involved in the Rahu Ketu axis as they will
indicate the areas of your life that will be affected by this dasha. Most people will experience this
axis only once in their lives and find it can bring with it intense experiences.

<<<PAGE 160>>>
Gochara - Transits
A natal chart indicates the actual position of the planets and the notional position of the axis
Rahu/Ketu, at the moment of someone’s birth. Since that moment they have continued to move
around the zodiac. They still interact with natal charts at times; a period of interaction is called a
gochara or transit. Transits may only last a relatively short time but they can be powerful and
they are always considered in conjunction with the dashas: any transit by the ruler of your
current maha dasha will be important. Most transits are looked at from the position of the Moon
as the indicator of the mind; I also look at transits from the ascendant. If both are showing a
similar transit and are backed up by the trend of the dasha, I know the influence will be
undeniable. There are brief transits from the fast moving planets, like the Sun, Mercury, Mars
and Venus, which can highlight short term issues - like meeting a romantic partner when Venus
transits the seventh house (as it does once a year). This transit won’t have a permanent effect as
Venus will only stay there for about 25 days before it moves on. It can indicate a pleasant
interlude rather than far-reaching events.
The planetary orbits through each sign of the zodiac is shown as follows:
How a New Transit will Affect you
Making a chart for the moment at which a planet enters a new sign will help you prepare for the
transit ahead, by indicating where and how the transiting planet will make its impact on your
natal chart. Use the natal chart with natal Moon on the ascendant. The position of the Moon on

<<<PAGE 161>>>
the chart for the entry into the new sign will show the transit’s focus.
A transit by any planet continues from the moment that it enters a particular zodiac sign to the
moment it leaves it. Transits of the Sun, Mars, Venus and Mercury through a sign are relatively
fast. Jyotish considers the major transits to be those of Saturn and Jupiter, because they are much
longer. By and large, transiting Saturn brings struggle and negativity and shows you where there
is a problem in your life; Jupiter brings good luck and shows how the problem will be sorted out.
The Moon’s transits are vital in planning your daily life.
Transits of the Moon
We should continually be aware of the waxing and waning cycles of the Moon, and its position
in different nakshatras, as they affect us in so many ways. In India no one begins a new project
during a waning phase. Here again, the nakshatras are important: if you want to plan your life to
go with the ebb and flow of the Moon’s cycle (as we still do in India), you will need an
ephemeris showing which nakshatra the Moon is in from day to day.
A quick way to check is to count from the nakshatra of your natal Moon to the nakshatra of
the day and divide the number by nine (if divisible). The remaining number indicates the type of
day you are going to face:
1.    Janma - birth nakshatra.
Physical danger - not a good day to begin journeys or start any activity that might be
considered risky, but normal travel or day-to-day activities can be carried on as usual.
2.    Sampat - wealth and prosperity.
You will achieve what you are planning to do - this is a positive day.
3.    Vipat - danger, losses and accidents.
4.    Kshema - prosperity.
5.    Pratyak - obstacles.
6.    Sadhana - a day for realising ambitions.
7.    Naidhana - dangers and difficulties.
8.    Mitra - a good day.
9.    Param mitra - a very good day.
Waxing and the Waning Phases of the Moon
The Moon’s transits are seen by Vedic astrologers as a catalyst for events involving slower-
moving planets. The waxing Moon cycle is also used in mahurata (electional astrology) to
establish exact auspicious timing for events involving the starting up of anything. Similarly, the
waning cycle is suitable for closing down and for processes of assimilation, but never for new
projects. It doesn’t matter whether the task you want to accomplish is great or small; plan your
month ahead looking at the phases of the Moon and organise events for the days when the energy
involved is at its best. It will give you a very good idea of how your days are going to turn out.
For important events in your life, it is advisable to have the time properly elected by a
professional Vedic astrologer.
Tarabala Grid - The Nakshatras by the Day

<<<PAGE 162>>>
Write the name of your natal Moon nakshatra next to Janma, at the top of the first column; then
continue adding the nakshatras in order, starting at the top of the following row when you have
filled the first column, and so on until the chart is complete. The nakshatras falling into rows 1,
3, 5 and 7 do not vibrate well with your natal nakshatra; it’s useful to note when the Moon
transits these and plan accordingly. In general terms, if the transiting Moon is not in a favourable
nakshatra it is probably a good idea to have a quiet day! Keeping a diary is a really effective way
of understanding how much you are in tune with the lunar energy - see what the effect is when
you ‘go against’ the trend for the day.
You can also use this table to check which of your natal planets fall into difficult nakshatras.
These are the ones that are likely to give troublesome dashas.
Transits of Saturn
This is the planet of difficulties, obstruction and unwilling change. It is slow-moving and its
purpose is to make us understand the limitations imposed upon us in life. It destroys our illusions
and makes us face up to reality. By understanding the difficulties of a Saturn transit, you will be
able plan accordingly. This transit does not have to be negative if you understand the role of
Saturn and its potential. At the end of a Saturn transit, we are older and (hopefully) wiser. It
teaches us patience and endurance. Remember: you cannot escape Saturn’s restrictions. You
have to learn to live with them and the best way to cope is through study, knowledge (Jupiter)
and patience (Saturn).
Here are some very general guidelines on what to expect from the major transits of Saturn to
your natal chart. Of course, each of us will experience them differently, according to the
particular strengths and vulnerable points of our charts, and Saturn’s influence in them.
Saturn’s Transits of Your Natal Moon
•    Sade Sati
Sade sati is the most important of Saturn’s transits and I really can’t emphasise this enough. It
takes seven and a half years and is based on the natal chart with Moon ascending, beginning

<<<PAGE 163>>>
when Saturn enters the twelfth house and ending when it leaves the second house. Its most
intense phase is the period when Saturn is 2-3º either side of the natal Moon. If Saturn is in Aries
all those with natal Moon in Pisces, Aries and Taurus are affected. Those with Moons in Pisces
will be in the last phase of it; when Saturn moves into Taurus, their sade sati will be over and
that of people with natal Moon in Gemini will begin. The beginning of the transit will give an
indication of the issues that will have to be faced. Sade sati results in a complete personal
transformation, with changed priorities and usually a change in career or life direction. It is likely
that you will have sade sati three times in your life, about every 24 years.
This is the most important transit you will look for when you study your birth chart. Periods of
sade sati are crucial points in life when changes take place that require patience and wisdom to
deal with; I know this sounds daunting but you must not worry unduly about this period. It is a
time that can bring about immense growth if the energies are used properly. It will only be
stressful if we try to avoid the issues that come up.
When Saturn moves into the twelfth house from the Moon it indicates the beginning of the end
of a phase of life. To determine which phase this is you need to consider the house position of
the Moon, and the dasha you are experiencing.
If the Moon is placed in the tenth house from the ascendant, the sade sati will affect the ninth
house (father or higher education), tenth house (career), and eleventh house (gains and earnings)
as counted from the ascendant.
Counting the transit from the Moon it would affect the twelfth house (loss and endings), first
house (self) and second house (personal wealth). The second is also a maraka house so a Saturn
transit through here leads to some unexpected ending in your life.
To cope with sade sati you have to see the bigger picture. As it is a long transit it is unlikely
that every day will be difficult. Imagine it to be like a long winter - you need to be prepared!
With a sade sati, recognising the difficult times of life actually makes them easier to deal with.
The dasha at the time of the sade sati is important. If you are experiencing a dasha of a sixth,
eighth or twelfth house ruler then the general trend of your life is also suggesting change,
transformation and difficulties (similar things to sade sati) so its effect could be extremely
intense. If however, your dashas are of the auspicious fifth or ninth house rulers they will balance
the restrictions of sade sati.
•    Kantaka Shani
This happens when Saturn transits the house four ahead of where the natal Moon is placed: for
example while Saturn is in Aries, it will be experienced by people with their natal Moon in
Capricorn and will last for about two and a half years. When Saturn moves into Taurus, it will be
the turn of those whose natal Moon is in Aquarius to have kantaka shani. Highlighting fourth
house issues, this is usually a difficult period for home affairs, children and relationships. People
often get divorced or move house at this time but be warned - you can’t dodge Saturn’s influence
by changing partners or homes in advance!
•    Ashtama Shani
Again of two and a half years’ duration, this transit of Saturn affects the eighth house from the
natal Moon: while Saturn is in Aries, people with natal Moon in Virgo will be having ashtama
shani; when it goes into Taurus it will be the turn of natal Moons in Libra. Eighth house issues
are very intense and difficult ones anyway and this transit can lead to the traumatic break-up of
close relationships. It is usually a time to renegotiate partnerships but not a good time to enter
into new ones.

<<<PAGE 164>>>
Transits of Saturn to the Natal Sun
In general, Saturn’s transits of the Sun indicate the culmination of something connected with the
Sun: your career, your father or with regard to authority (your own or other people’s). Of course,
the only way to go from the heights is downwards!
When Saturn transits the seventh house from your natal Sun it is in the sign opposite it. With
Saturn currently in Aries, those with natal Sun in Libra are affected by this at present. This transit
can be good for your career - but very bad for your marriage!
A transit of Saturn through the fourth house from your natal Sun indicates a new beginning in
your life but also a period of emotional turmoil. When Saturn goes into Aries, those with natal
Sun in Capricorn will have this transit, which can also manifest itself as a change of residence.
The best of the ‘Saturn to natal Sun’ transits is where Saturn is in the tenth house from the
Sun. While Saturn is in Aries, those with natal Sun in Cancer will have this transit. Concerned
with tenth house issues, this transit can bring power and success and is considered to be a good
one.
Saturn Conjunct Natal Saturn
This major transit occurs every 29 years and 10 months, when transiting Saturn returns to the
degree and minute of the sign it was in at the time of your birth. At this point there is an erasing
of past karma and you have the chance of a fresh start in life: you can look towards the future in
a new way. It is likely that you will experience two Saturn returns in your life, perhaps three; the
first in particular is seen as a coming-of-age.
Saturn Opposite Natal Saturn
This is the halfway point of the return cycle outlined above. It is the climax of the hard,
Saturnian work begun 14 years before, when it was in its natal place. It can be looked at as a
personal exaltation for your Saturnian aims.
Saturn’s Ingress into the Signs
This should help you to work out exactly when Saturn’s influence will be felt:

<<<PAGE 165>>>
When there are two dates shown for Saturn’s ingress into a particular sign, it indicates that
Saturn has moved into the sign, retrograded backwards into the previous sign, then moved
forwards again.
Transits of Jupiter - enjoy the good karma!
These are much more pleasant than transits of Saturn! Whatever the state of your natal chart,
Jupiter transits are good! Jupiter is the great benefic: expansive and giving. The only place it may
not give so much the feel-good factor is in Capricorn. As it creates a balance for Saturnian
energy, the combination of a difficult Saturn transit and Jupiter in a debilitated sign might be a
little tough. In India, people avoid doing anything during Jupiter’s debilitation that can be left for
a more auspicious day. Its escape into Aquarius is celebrated at the Kumbha Mela festival
which begins as soon as the Sun has moved into Aquarius to join Jupiter.
Jupiter usually stays in a sign for about one year (though the length of time does vary) so each
year different areas of your life will be highlighted according to which house is being occupied.
Transits of Jupiter highlight the sign opposite and the fifth, ninth and seventh houses from its
current position. While Jupiter is moving through Pisces it will be aspecting Cancer, Virgo and
Scorpio. Its contact with Venus or the ruler of the seventh house always indicates a romance,
while a transit of Jupiter opposite the natal Moon or Lagna indicates a good time to get married
or a happy phase in an existing one. One of my clients experiencing a seventh house transit of
Jupiter found her husband had booked them onto a romantic cruise!
A Jupiter transit to:
The Sun  -   brings success, perhaps promotion in your career.
Moon  
-   brings peace of mind.
Mercury  -   enhances your intellect and improves your finances.
Venus  
-   is similar to a transit of the seventh house as it brings romance into your life
and improves existing romantic relationships. It is an auspicious time to get
married.
Mars  
-   gives you initiative and the courage to make changes.
Saturn  
-   eases its heavy influence and makes the lessons of Saturn easier to deal with.
Rahu  
-   can move you towards a spiritual direction different from that which is
socially acceptable. It can highlight dealings with foreigners and also foreign
travel.
Ketu  
-   also indicates a change of spiritual direction, stemming from a sudden
dissatisfaction with your life’s present path.
A Jupiter return to the position it was in on your natal chart is the ending of one cycle and the
