# source: _OceanofPDF.com_The_Contemporary_Astrologers_Handbook_-_Sue_Tompkins.pdf
# pages: 1-60
# compiled into: interpretation.json
# regenerate: knowledge/build/extract_chapters.py


<<<PAGE 1>>>

<<<PAGE 2>>>
The Contemporary
Astrologer’s
Handbook
an in-depth guide to interpreting your horoscope
Sue Tompkins

<<<PAGE 3>>>
OceanofPDF.com

<<<PAGE 4>>>
To Maureen Barker with love

<<<PAGE 5>>>
OceanofPDF.com

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Acknowledgements
Many people have helped directly and indirectly in the writing of this book.
The true list might include every student I have ever taught and every client
I have ever had a conversation with, but this much shortened version
focuses on some of my closest buddies in the astrological world. Firstly
thanks to Frank Clifford for agreeing to publish the book in the first place
and for making such a good job of it, and to Jane Struthers for her editing
skills and for her input generally. To Tamara Stamenkovic for her artwork
and to Deana Necic for her ideas and expertise. Huge thanks too to Jane
Hastings for being such a good friend; to Melanie Reinhart for Chironic and
other conversations; and to Barbara Norris for negotiating with Metro.
More generally, my long-term appreciation goes to Kim Farley, Babs Kirby,
Lindsay Radermacher, and to members of maybe the oldest astrological
group in town: Victoria Harper, Laura Thoresby and Gill Young. Also to all
my friends at 60° North, especially Nan Lemaréchal (Oslo), Marit Dahl
(Stockholm), Iris Hallankukka and Marita Hölttä (Helsinki). Also to Marja-
Liisa Niemi Mattila for her professional generosity when I was working in
Finland.
Sue Tompkins, August 2006

<<<PAGE 7>>>
OceanofPDF.com

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Contents
Title Page
Dedication
Acknowledgements
Chapter 1 First Things First – Philosophical Underpinnings
Chapter 2 Elements and Modes
The Elements
Fire • Earth • Air • Water
Elemental Lacks
The Modes
Cardinality • Fixity • Mutability
Chapter 3 The Zodiac Signs
Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpio
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces
More on the Signs: the Six Pairs

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Chapter 4 The Planets and Other Essential Bodies
The Sun
How to Interpret the Sun – Recapping the Main Points
The Moon
The Moon Through The Signs
The Void-of-Course Moon
Mercury
Mercury Retrograde
Mercury Through The Signs
Venus
Venus Through The Signs
Mars
Mars Through The Signs
Jupiter
Jupiter Through The Signs
Saturn
Saturn Through The Signs
The Outer Planets
Uranus
Uranus Through The Signs
Neptune
Neptune Through The Signs
Pluto
Pluto Through The Signs
Planetary Dignities
Chapter 5 Aspects and Planetary Combinations

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Part One: The Aspects
Orbs • The Conjunction • The Opposition • The Square • The Semi-Square
and Sesquiquadrate • The Trine • The Sextile • The Quincunx • The Quintile
• The Septile • Dissociate Aspects • Applying and Separating Aspects •
Charts without  Aspects • Most Aspected Planet • Unaspected  Planets
Part Two: Aspect Patterns
The Stellium • The T-Square • The Grand Cross • The Grand Trine • The
Yod • The Kite and Mystic  Rectangle
Part Three: Planetary Combinations
Chapter 6 The Houses
The First House and the Ascendant
The Second House
The Third House
The Fourth House and the IC
The Fifth House
The Sixth House
The Seventh House and the Descendant
The Eighth House
The Ninth House
The Tenth House and the MC
The Eleventh House
The Twelfth House
The Importance of House Rulership
Chapter 7 Non-Essential Bodies
Part One: The Moon’s Nodes
Part Two: Chiron and the Centaurs
Pholus – the Lid Comes Off

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Nessus – the Buck Stops Here
Part Three: Asteroids
Chapter 8 Steps Towards Chart Interpretation and Synthesis
Interpretation Checklist
Chapter 9 Profiles
Henry VIII and an Illustration of T-Squares
Kelly Holmes and an Illustration  of the Sun/Moon Midpoint
Agatha Christie
On Integration: the Case of ‘Amanda’
Holistic Astrology – Peter and the Indian Cobra
The Chart for a Country – Indonesia
The Chart for an Accident
Notes and References

<<<PAGE 12>>>
OceanofPDF.com

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Chapter 1
First Things First – Philosophical Underpinnings
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven …
Ecclesiastes, 3:1
Some form of astrology has probably been practised in all cultures since
civilization began. Seemingly, the roots of Western astrology date back at
least several thousand years before Christ and to an area which embraces
modern-day Iraq and parts of Syria and Turkey. While the history of
astrology is rich and complex, the philosophical implications of the subject
are arguably even greater.
Anyone who studies astrology seriously for a while will discover for
themselves that it does work and, having made that discovery, questions
such as ‘How can it work?’ start to exercise the imagination. Then those
other, sometimes dormant, often nagging, questions such as ‘Why am I
here?’, ‘Who is God?’ also re-assert themselves. As with any rich and
exciting subject, astrology can present us with as many questions as it
answers. Regrettably many of the wider philosophical ramifications of
astrology, and speculations as to how it might work, have to be largely set
aside here.¹ What follows are a few, fairly standard, philosophical principles
which underpin my particular way of viewing and practising astrology.
Fate and Free Will
One of the issues that astrologers and would-be astrologers alike grapple
with is the issue of fate and free will. One question is: If astrology is true
does it mean that our lives are fated? For me, the answer to this question is
to be found in the Yes and No universal box of answers. Undoubtedly we
must take full responsibility for our lives and for both our successes and
failures, and to some extent we are also responsible for much that happens

<<<PAGE 14>>>
around us. Equally, there is nothing that happens to us, and nothing that we
do, which is not reflected as a possibility or likelihood in our horoscope.
The natal chart is basically a map of potential. Like a picture on a packet of
garden seeds, it shows what we might become. Perhaps the best way of
viewing the fate and free will question is to turn to the subject of maps.
After all, the birth chart is quite literally a map for a particular moment.
Talking metaphorically, imagine that you were born with a map of the
Kalahari Desert and that I was born with a map of Birmingham. One might
say that the Kalahari is your fate and that Birmingham is my fate. Our
choices and potential are different. I have roads and canals that I can go up
and down, and shops I can frequent but just because I have all the various
features in my map it doesn’t mean that I will visit them or, if I do, that I
will do so consciously. In your map of the Kalahari you have different
choices: choices of country, choices of game park, choices of whether to
keep cattle or hunt wild game, choices as to whether you listen to the
weaver birds or notice the acacias. So we both have at least some degree of
free will but our choices are circumscribed by the perimeters of our
particular map. Such perimeters might be described as our fate.
Of course the individual and their horoscope do not exist in a vacuum. We
are all also at the mercy of a much larger fate – the destiny of our country,
for instance. The fate of the individual is, to an extent, eclipsed by the fate
of the greater whole. Similarly, the fate of one’s country is secondary to the
fate of the continent or the planet itself. Astrology offers an opportunity for
glimpsing the potential of both destinies and, in so doing, increasing the
opportunity for the exercise of free will. Governments, businesses, events –
anything that has a beginning has a horoscope and will be caught up in the
particular planetary cycles of the time of its inception.
Macrocosm and Microcosm
The idea that the cosmos is a unity and that all parts of it are interdependent
is basic to most subjects under the occult, New Age and healing umbrella;
in fact, it is central to the alchemists of yesterday and the quantum
physicists of today. The ramifications of this way of thinking are vast, for if
the universe is a whole and everything in it is a part of that whole, then
hurting one small portion of it (even treading on an ant) means we also hurt

<<<PAGE 15>>>
the whole, including ourselves. Allied to the idea of unity and
interdependence is the concept of macrocosm and microcosm. Stated
simply this means that all happenings, all manifestations in and by the
universe (macrocosm) are also reflected inside every individual
(microcosm). Science confirms that all of nature can be broken down into
the 118 elements that comprise the periodic table, so each human being
actually contains all aspects of the world around them – all the plants,
animals, minerals and celestial bodies.
The Hermetic Doctrine
Alchemy is often known as hermetic philosophy after Hermes Trismegistus,
who, if he existed as a single individual, did so around 1900 BC. He is often
thought of as the father of the alphabet, astronomy and mathematics as well
as astrology and alchemy. His secret doctrine was only revealed to the few
who came from far and wide to study at the mystery schools of Egypt. The
term ‘hermetically sealed’ reveals how secret the doctrine was. The
compilation of basic hermetic doctrines, passed on from teacher to student,
was known as ‘The Kybalion’, and from it come the seven hermetic
principles, all of which are confirmed by astrological practice.
i) The principle of mentalism. This first principle is perhaps the most
difficult to grasp and perhaps should be set aside for the moment. Briefly
the principle states that the universe is a mental creation of All That Is. This
principle is basically concerning itself with God, infinity and eternity,
which for most of us are unknowable.
ii) The principle of correspondence which states As Above, So Below, As
Below, So Above. One might add, As Within, So Without. In other words,
as it is in the heavens, so it is on earth. As it is on the physical plane, so it is
on the mental and spiritual planes. As it is in the body, so it is in the mind.
Each is a reflection of the other. The already mentioned notion of
macrocosm and microcosm is one example of the principle of
correspondence. There will be more on this subject later.

<<<PAGE 16>>>
iii) The principle of vibration, which states that nothing rests, everything is
in a state of flux, in constant and never-ending motion. Even the Earth,
which we experience as being pretty fixed, is rotating on its axis and
revolving around the Sun. Philosophers and scientists since time
immemorial have said much the same thing: Aristotle (384–322 BC) said
that all things are in motion all of the time, but this fact escapes our
perception; Heraclitus (535–475 BC) held that the world is like a flowing
river and that you cannot step into the same river twice. So all things
vibrate, or they could be said to have a vibration rate. By changing the
vibration, one changes the manifestation. Water at a high vibration is steam
and at a lower vibration is ice. By changing its vibration, water manifests
itself differently.
iv) The principle of polarity or duality, which states that everything has an
opposite pole. All opposites are identical in nature but different in degree.
Up and down are opposite to each other, as are light and dark. There is no
such place as ‘up’ and no such place as ‘down’ – each is relative to the
other. As with everything else on the list, the idea of polarity applies to
emotional states, too. Love and hate, joy and despair are just two examples.
v) The principle of rhythm, which states that all things have their cycles,
their tides; an ebb tide and a flood tide. All things flow in and out, all things
rise and fall. All things go through the process of birth, growth,
deterioration and death, and death can be taken to be a beginning, as well as
an end point. There are thousands of such cycles – each day being one of
them, each breath being another. Some cycles may last only seconds, others
millions of years. If one accepts this (to me) self-evident truth that
everything goes through the process of birth, growth, deterioration and
death, then that must also apply to the Earth itself. Indeed, it seems to me
that the Earth, or Western society at any rate, has reached middle age, even
late middle age. The reason for this conclusion is the observation that the
speed of life has increased substantially, especially in the inner cities. This
can be taken as analogous to the fact that, as they get older, people report
that time seems to go so much faster and, towards the end of life, that it
goes very fast indeed. For the child, on the other hand, everything seems to
go very slowly.

<<<PAGE 17>>>
vi) The principle of cause and effect, which states that every cause has its
effect and every effect has its cause. According to this principle, everything
happens according to this law and there is no such thing as ‘coincidence’.
There are many layers of causation and what seems to be chance has really
been caused by something or, usually, several things. The cause and effect
principle might also be defined as the law of consequences because every
thought, action or event has repercussions. Thought, however fleeting,
comes before action. Everything we say or do, however trivial, has a
consequence – it affects something. And whatever is affected, in turn,
affects something else. From physics we learn that for every action there is
an equal and opposite reaction. Not only does every act – mental, emotional
or physical – project outwards and have a consequence, the same energy
also rebounds back upon us, rather like a boomerang. In the East, the
principle of cause and effect is known as karma² and isn’t usually thought to
be limited to the one life; if taken to its logical conclusion, it leads on to the
notion of reincarnation. Astrologers don’t necessarily believe in
reincarnation (I am open-minded on this issue) and it is not necessary to
believe in it in order to accept the principle of cause and effect. Whatever
the reader’s personal beliefs, the subject might as well be touched on at this
point. The reincarnationist world view suggests that the physical body is but
a vessel and, when it dies, the soul is reborn again and again.³ The body is
viewed as being merely a tool to enable the individual to live out their
soul’s purpose (s). In each life the individual reaps what they have sown in
previous lives and also sows the seeds that can be harvested in a future life.
Thus, according to the law of karma, our thoughts and actions may rebound
upon us either in this life or in a future one. In each and every moment, we
are creating both the next stage of our current life and also a future life, or
so the theory goes. Thus, while the legacy of what we have set in motion in
previous lives limits, at least to some extent, our current freedoms (and such
limits might be defined as our fate), it can be seen that we can also change
our future to some extent. While we cannot change what has already
happened, we can certainly change our attitude to events and, given that
action follows thought, by changing our attitudes we can change our
destiny.

<<<PAGE 18>>>
vii) The principle of gender, which states that all things have a yin and yang
(or masculine and feminine) principle. The yang force is outgoing, positive
and instigating, while the yin force is receptive and incoming. This again
works on physical, emotional and spiritual levels. Even when having a
conversation with someone, one can see the yin-yang principle at work. The
person who is talking is in yang mode (giving out) and the person listening
is in yin mode (receiving). In astrology, the fire and air signs are dubbed
positive (or masculine), while the earth and water signs are negative (or
feminine). Similarly, with the planets, the Sun and Mars are obviously yang
and the Moon and Venus obviously yin.
More on Correspondences
While we live in a heliocentric (Sun-centred) universe, due to the Earth’s
rotation, as we go about our daily business we appear to live in a geocentric
(Earth-centred) world: the Sun and all the planets appear to revolve around
us. While the horoscope can be, and sometimes is, drawn from the
heliocentric perspective, it is more commonly drawn from the point of view
of human experience and thus depicted geocentrically.
Imagine yourself walking on the Earth. You have no buildings around you
to obscure your view. The land under your feet is your horizon. You can
look to the east and look to the west and watch sunrise and sunset. At
lunchtime the Sun is overhead, and after sunset the Sun disappears
altogether. Bear in mind that your particular horizon will be different to
everyone else’s horizon, unless they happen to be standing on the same spot
of land as you. This is basically the start of a horoscope. The upper part
represents daylight and the lower part night-time.
A Map of Life: a Starting Point for Correspondences
In fact, we can go further with our circle for it can be viewed as a map
depicting a day, a year or a life. Assuming that it doesn’t rain, what is the
wettest time of day? The answer has to be the morning when there is dew
on the ground. During the day, the Sun rises in the sky, creating heat and a
drying effect, thus sunset is the dry time of day. It is hot at noon but actually
hotter in the middle of the afternoon. Similarly the air is at its coldest some

<<<PAGE 19>>>
time after midnight, in the early hours. The year is similar: roughly
speaking, spring is wet, autumn is dry, summer is hot and winter is cold.
The individual’s life is no different. We are at our wettest as a baby but dry
out with advancing age. Old age is often referred to as the autumn years; a
dry time when leaves go crisp underfoot and bones crack, skin dries out and
wrinkles appear.
We can easily add the elements of fire, earth, air and water and also add
colours and tastes to our circular map of life. Hopefully these are self-
explanatory. Water has surely to be associated with blue, and do not salt and
water always go together? Fire goes with red. As foods ripen in the sun they
grow sweeter. When onions or any vegetables are fried, they become sweet.
We grow bitter as we grow older and bitter foods tend to grow closer to the
earth. Air can be associated with cold – if our food is hot, we blow air on it
to cool it. If we leave milk out in the air it goes sour. We use the refrigerator
or a fan – both systems of moving air – when we wish to bring down
temperatures. The monthly Moon phases can also be added to the diagram,
as can the equinoxes and solstices, and obviously the intermediary compass
points.

<<<PAGE 20>>>
Note that this illustration is offered as a way of understanding how some
correspondences might arise – it is a map of life in general, and shouldn’t
be confused with actual horoscopes. Among different cultures, there are
various versions of the elements and seasons. This particular model differs
from that used by many astrologers and herbalists who, following the ideas
of Plato, have ascribed a warm and moist quality to air. The model
presented here accords more with my personal experience. It may have
some historical credibility as the 4th-century physician Philistion seems to
have favoured it. However, it is not necessary for the astrologer to adopt
this diagram or even for the beginning student to understand it. Neither can
I confidently assert that it is absolutely true. It is presented simply to
illustrate that a day, a year and a life all reflect each other, and to suggest
how seemingly unrelated things can reasonably be associated with each
other.
The idea of correspondences has been embraced by alchemists and
astrologers for centuries, and I doubt if there is an astrologer on the planet
who wouldn’t, for example, connect all kinds of inflammatory situations
with Mars. Indeed, astrology might be described as the study of
correspondences. The exciting thing about making these kinds of
connections is that there is plenty of room for making more of them. All one
has to be is observant and confirm one’s observations time and time again
to be sure that the ascriptions arrived at are the correct ones. Over the years,
I have been able to ascribe different planets, signs and aspects to various
members of the animal kingdom. For instance, in my observation (and this
might accord with tradition also) the bird kingdom as a whole comes under
Aquarius (see pages 64–7). To hone in on individual bird species, you
should use all the zodiac signs: poultry may come under the subdivision of
Cancer; swans (royal birds), peacocks and the like, under Leo; small birds
such as sparrows under Virgo, and so on. One can do the same with insects,
reptiles and all flora and fauna. Indeed, one can do it with all of life: notice
how news stories concerning the police often ‘coincide’ with times when
there are several planets in the sky in Taurus; how golfers will often have a
Capricorn emphasis or Mercury-Saturn aspects in their charts; how
Europeans visit Australia under Uranus transits, and countless other

<<<PAGE 21>>>
examples. With a little thought, one can usually work out why the given
activity or place can be linked to the relevant symbolism.
One can make such connections without stepping outside one’s front door
just by observing what is happening in the world and in the sky. On page 15
is the front page for the London newspaper, Metro, on 28 June 2000. A
casual glance will reveal little, but look a little more closely and notice that,
at the top, the reader is advised of a review inside the paper of the then
newly released film Chicken Run. The activities of the British tennis player
Tim Henman are promised on the back page and the cook Nigella Lawson
is writing on fowl on page 10. All this poultry imagery is rather jokey, but
watching the cosmos at work is jokey. The headline runs: ‘Family backs
Dando suspect.’ At the risk of stretching things a little too far, a similar
word to Dando in French – dindon – means turkey! With the allusion to
family and all the references to chickens, it will not surprise any astrologer
to learn that on that day the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars and North Node
were all in the sign of Cancer – a sign to associate with family matters, food
and poultry. The other sign that is most concerned with food is Taurus, and
the Moon, Jupiter and Saturn were in that sign. The observant astrologer
will be able to find yet more Cancerian imagery on this front page, should
they choose.
All news items inevitably reflect whatever is going on in the sky at a given
time and one doesn’t have to confine one’s observations to news items;
even something as trivial as light entertainment will reflect the heavens.
Turn on the TV and be prepared to channel-hop. Or turn to a TV listings
magazine (the Radio Times is best in the UK because it gives more detail
and also includes radio programmes). It doesn’t matter which day you
choose, or which medium you use (TV just happens to be easy), you will
find subject matters that are clustered around a given theme. Of course, the
most profound astrological deductions can often be gleaned from watching
happenings in our own life and through observing the lives of the people
around us.

<<<PAGE 22>>>

<<<PAGE 23>>>
Although the empirical approach to science is not popular at the current
time, for me, as long as one is rigorous in checking one’s observations, it is
still a very valid approach to employ. Consider astrologer/alchemist
Paracelsus (1493–1541), the father of modern medicine, physiology,
biochemistry, pharmacy as well as many complementary medicines. He was
taught by his father, Wilhelmus, not to rely simply on books or the opinions
of other authorities, but to observe nature directly and to learn from
personal experience.⁴ This he did. However much our knowledge has
increased since the time of Paracelsus, there is still much that we don’t
know and also much knowledge that has been lost. Wilhelmus’s advice
holds as true today as it did in the 16th century: there is nothing wrong with
having an empirical approach to science. Nothing happens randomly. As
Jung puts it: ‘Whatever is born or done at a particular moment of time has
the quality of that moment of time.’ In watching this process at work, the
astrologer is able to have fun and potentially to make discoveries.
We are not all exposed to the same world and, even when we are, there are
different ways of looking at that world and interpreting it. Arguably, it is the
job of the astrologer to look at things from a wider perspective, perhaps
from an inner, magical or soul perspective – rather as a priest, shaman or
psychotherapist might. Or if that sounds too esoteric, one might just say that
the horoscope is a map and the astrologer is a map-reader. Maps draw our
attention to things that we might not otherwise notice (e.g. the remains of
the Stone Age fort over yonder), maps help to give us a sense of
perspective– we can see where we are in relation to everything else – and,
finally, maps help us find our way. The astrologer’s job includes making the
whole process of navigating through life that bit easier.
That doesn’t mean that the professional astrologer should be telling their
clients where to go; the astrologer’s job includes looking at the map and
helping clients to find out where they are now. An example may help. Mrs
Bloggs consults an astrologer about her work situation. She is unhappy at
work because she feels her boss is being overly dictatorial and ‘getting at
her’. She reports feeling crushed and frightened. Mrs Bloggs wants her
astrologer to tell her whether she should leave her job and try to find
another one. Undoubtedly the astrologer would be able to assess whether
now is a good time for finding a new job/going self-employed/changing her

<<<PAGE 24>>>
line of work/retirement, and so on. Indeed, the odds may be so stacked in
the sky that the astrologer may even be able to guess pretty much what will
happen. However, it is also the case that Mrs Bloggs is responsible for her
life and needs to make her own decisions. Also things change by the simple
expedient of looking at them – as always, energy follows thought.
The astrologer’s job may actually be less about predicting what will happen
next and more about interpreting what is happening now. For example, Mrs
Bloggs may have a Tenth House Pluto, and Saturn in the sky may be
conjuncting it, describing her current feelings and situation. The Tenth
House refers to all authority figures including parents. The astrologer,
knowing this, might ask Mrs Bloggs if her boss reminds her of anyone from
her past, or if she has ever experienced feelings before which are similar to
the ones she is experiencing now. The chances are that Mrs Bloggs will say
something like: ‘It’s funny you should say that, my boss reminds me of my
mother, who terrified me. I used to feel I was being criticized all the time. I
feel now like I did when I was five.’ The astrologer might then suggest that
Mrs Bloggs is transferring her early feelings of impotence on to her current
situation. As a child, Mrs Bloggs was powerless in the face of her parent but
she is no longer a child. Now she is in a much stronger position to talk to
her boss than she ever would have been with her mother. So she is being
offered an opportunity. After the conversation, Mrs Bloggs may be able to
view her situation differently. She might also speculate that, if she doesn’t
deal with the issues of feeling criticized and powerless now, she is likely to
meet up with them again some time in the future. After all, when we travel,
most of us take our baggage with us. It may be that changing her work
situation and her boss is entirely appropriate for Mrs Bloggs. What is
important is that whatever she chooses to do, she does so with as much
awareness as possible, and that she makes her own decisions and is able to
take responsibility for doing so.
Of course there remains the question of the degree to which her mother (and
boss) was overly critical of her, and the degree to which she has projected
her own criticism of herself on to these authority figures, but that kind of
discussion can be left for another time.
The point is that the astrologer’s job is, in my view, to discover the inner
truth of a situation, in as far as that is possible. Astrology has almost
limitless potential to increase consciousness and to shed light on endless

<<<PAGE 25>>>
situations. En route to being able to do this, the astrology student needs to
become fluent in the basic language of the horoscope – the elements, signs,
planets, houses and aspects.
Notes – Chapter 1: First Things First – Philosophical Underpinnings
1. The reader wishing to know about the practice of astrology and touch on
some philosophy from a contemporary and practical ‘hands on’ viewpoint
would do well to read Dennis Elwell’s excellent book Cosmic Loom, The
Urania Trust, 1999.
2. The word ‘karma’ is usually translated as meaning ‘action’, and comes
from the Sanskrit word kri meaning ‘to do’.
3. Much of our understanding of karma and reincarnation is derived from
the Hindu teachings of about 3500 BC, which are enshrined in the ancient
scriptures known as The Vedas.
4. According to Matthew Wood, The Magical Staff – The Vitalist Tradition
in Western Medicine, North Atlantic Books, 1992.

<<<PAGE 26>>>
OceanofPDF.com

<<<PAGE 27>>>
Chapter 2
Elements and Modes
The Elements (or Triplicities)
Since the discovery of the periodic table and its 118 elements, the word ‘elements’ nowadays conjures up
something much more complex than merely air, earth, fire and water. Even so, these basic four elements still
provide a construct upon which it is possible to view both the natural world and human behaviour.
The four elements represent four basic ways of perceiving and processing stimuli.¹ These four ways can be
summarized as:
The impulse to make something happen or, if already in existence, the need to establish where it may be coming
from or going to, and what it might mean. (Fire)
The urge to make the fiery impulse a tangible reality or, if in existence already, the need to touch it and smell it.
(Earth)
The urge to communicate with or about ‘it’, possibly to name ‘it’ or establish what ‘it’ is. (Air)
The need to emotionally connect with ‘it’ and to decide whether ‘it’ is agreeable or not. (Water)
In combination with the qualities, the elements are major building blocks of the zodiac and therefore provide an
aid to understanding each of the twelve signs. Individuals and all horoscopes are made up of all the elements and
qualities but some birth charts will have an obvious emphasis on some and an under-emphasis on others. Thus, an
understanding of the elements and modes does more than foster an understanding of the signs: it can provide a
starting point towards understanding the whole horoscope. While what follows concentrates on the elements in
terms of human experience, it is no less relevant to consider what a preponderance or lack of an element might
mean in a horoscope set for a company, country or event. For example, it is not uncommon for horoscopes set for
the time of accidents to be weak in the earth element.
Fire – Aries, Leo, Sagittarius
Fire provides warmth and light and, just as heat always rises, the fire signs are characterized by their upbeat
quality, their enthusiasm, their innate faith in life and, often, in themselves. Frequently there is an infectious
optimism and a joy in living; sometimes even a Tigger-like bounce. As with a fire in the grate which becomes
temporarily subdued for a time when logs are placed on it, the fiery type isn’t crushed for long. Neither does
classic fire hold grudges. Having said that, if there is a stronger presence of earth or water in a horoscope, these
elements can do much to dampen the planets that are in fire, while planets in air will fan the flames.
The fire signs have a vision of how things could be and a gift for inspiration; each fire sign in differing ways can
ignite others into enthusiasm and action. Aries ignites with the idea of a cause or of being a pioneer or warrior; Leo
inspires others through appealing to honour, loyalty or the noble spirit; while Sagittarius gets others going through
its quest for meaning and desire ‘to go further’, whether this be physically, emotionally or spiritually. Thus, the
purpose of fire is to lead, inspire and imbue others with confidence. The fire signs are positive and tend towards
extroversion and spontaneity. Fire is stimulating and good at just ‘making things happen’. However, the classic
fiery type has a dislike of any kind of passive situation and undervalues the quality of just ‘being’. Fire has a
speedy quality, it provides the impulse to do something and also the vision of what the completed thing might be
like. The fiery type can sniff future possibilities and believe that they will become reality, and convince others that
they will, too.

<<<PAGE 28>>>
Overdeveloped, the fire signs periodically suffer from momentary collapse, they can burn themselves out by doing
too much. They can also exhaust others, particularly more pragmatic types, by waxing enthusiastically over
matters about which there is very little to enthuse.
Idealism rather than realism is the gift of fire – with one’s head on the ceiling it follows naturally that one’s
feet can’t touch the floor. Calmness, poise, sensitivity, empathy and subtlety are traits that don’t come easily
to the fiery type but may of course be found in other parts of the chart.
Earth – Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn
Our planet – the Earth – supports all life; we walk on it and we grow things in it. Not surprisingly, the earthy type
of person tends to be reliable and dependable Practical, thorough, realistic and ‘down-to-earth’, those who vibrate
strongly to this element are usually comfortable with life’s responsibilities, with earning a living, and with caring
for and maintaining the body. The earthy type understands and works in accord with the limitations of the material
world. They understand money and possessions and are aware of their own and others’ reliance on these things.
Earth is concerned with the ‘real’ world and, unlike fire, is not that interested in future possibilities. Each of the
earth signs has an appreciation for what is real and tangible, a concern for what ‘is’, not for what ‘might be’.
Taurus and Capricorn especially want to produce something in tangible form, ideally something that can be seen
and measured. Earth is at home with matter and feels quite insecure without it. This can apply to Virgo too, but
Virgo with its mutable quality and Mercury rulership is perhaps the least earthy of the earth signs, feeling as it does
slightly airy or more like sand.
The earth signs tend to be concerned with security in financial and material terms. Some earthy types will be
acquisitive and ambitious to have a ‘good life’, but, for many, being secure materially doesn’t necessarily mean
being rich. The needs of the earth signs (whose goals in life may be narrower than their fiery counterparts) may be
comparatively few, and many an earthy type feels comfortable as long as they have just enough, plus a little bit
more. Classically, the earthy type has a fairly even and calm temperament. A dry sense of humour may also be in
evidence.
If overdeveloped in the birth chart, earth can get bogged down by material considerations, reluctant to let anything
threaten their material security. Unable to take risks, even if making life changes may be just what is required. At
worst, overdeveloped earth can be narrow, overly cautious, conventional and conservative, perhaps even a plodder
and a slave to routine. The presence of fire or the strength of fiery planets can do much to offset some of these
tendencies.
Air – Gemini, Libra, Aquarius
Air has no form: it moves more from side to side than up and down, although air can and does go everywhere. Air
ensures that there is no such thing as empty space. The right/left movement of air symbolizes the basically even
temperament of the airy type. All sound, including speech and music, is dependent on air as all sound is produced
by some kind of vibration.
Fire envisioned something, earth produced it and now air has to inform everyone about it. It is also the task of air
to consider the implications of what has been produced and to generally decide where it falls in the general scheme
of things.
The strong need of those with an emphasis on the air signs is to communicate and to feel communicated with, so
relationships are essential to the airy type. While not necessarily warm or involved, typically airy people have
strong social skills; they understand about give and take and don’t get easily ruffled or take offence unnecessarily.
In many ways the social skills arise out of the airy ability to keep things in perspective and proportion. The airy
quality adds rationality, objectivity and an ability to take the long view. The strongly airy type may be interested in
your point of view and able to understand it, even without necessarily agreeing with you. Not one of the air signs is
depicted by animals and this also gives a clue to the very civilized nature of these signs.
At best, the airy type is refined, humane and courteous, with an awareness of the rights of others and a true sense
of fair play. At worst, and if overdeveloped, the airy type can be unrealistic and overly rational, ‘heady’ and

<<<PAGE 29>>>
theoretical. Air tends to see life in patterns and formulas and then coerce all of life experience into those formulas.
The problem is that things in practice can often be very different to how they are in theory. At worst, air is a slave
to theory and principles, and the overly airy type can become out of touch with the real world and their own more
personal needs. Excess air can also produce an indecisive, anxious and scattered quality.
Water – Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces
In nature, the water element can take on many forms: the babbling brook, a drizzle of rain, a stagnant pond and the
raging sea are a few images. Undoubtedly water is wet; it lubricates, it cleanses, things can get dissolved in it, and
without it there would be no life. Water has no form of its own and takes on the shape and colour of its container
and, even more important, water always goes to the lowest point.
The water signs tend to be more introverted and downbeat than the other elements. The water signs are concerned
with emotional security and belonging. With Cancer it is the family that provides a feeling of belonging, with
Scorpio an intense intimate relationship, and with Pisces it is nothing less than a feeling of oneness with the
universe, a spiritual belonging. As a glass of water needs the glass in order to feel contained, so the water signs can
reflect whoever they are with. The water signs tend to be impressionable (Scorpio is less so) and absorbent. Watery
types tend to be sensitive. They take on board all the feelings, subtleties and nuances around them and ideally
assimilate what needs to be assimilated and let the rest flow away. At worst the watery type can get waterlogged
and overwhelmed by all that they have picked up. With all this sensitivity it is not surprising that strongly watery
types tend to feel vulnerable and exposed and thus tend to be protective, often self-protective, and rather secretive.
With all the water signs there is a feeling of ‘still waters run deep’, a feeling that what you see is most definitely
not what you get, that so much more is submerged.
Working well, water is the most empathetic of the elements and also the most responsive. At best, water can feel as
you feel. The difficulty is that the overly-watery type may not be able to separate and may not know where you
leave off and they begin. Overdeveloped, water can be clingy, needy, dependent, irrational, manipulative, unable to
separate themselves from others and therefore over-identified with all that happens around them.
Elements in Combination
From an understanding of individual elements it is only a short step to understanding what they will be like in
combination. Much could be written here, but I will put it briefly. While the Fire/Earth type may lack subtlety, they
are likely to be dynamic; a visionary who gets things done, whatever the obstacle. Fire/Air may be an idealist full
of big ideas (hot air), whereas steamy Fire/Water, a real creative type, will tend towards emotionality and mood
swings. Earth/Water is the nurturer and burden-carrier of the zodiac and usually very concerned with their own and
others’ security. Earth/Air is a dry, pragmatic combination, often with a marked sense of humour and a very
practical intelligence. For the rather sedentary Air/Water type, relationship is everything and a good understanding
of people may be in evidence.
Elemental Lacks
As every horoscope embraces all twelve signs, no element can be truly said to be missing in any horoscope, nor in
an individual’s make-up. However, an element can be untenanted, i.e. there may be no planets falling in that
element. Or there may simply be fewer planets in the given element. When this happens, the characteristics of the
weak or missing element may manifest very strongly but operate from what appears to be an unconscious and less
accessible standpoint. The individual seems to have no control over, and difficulty processing, whatever the given
element signifies. Often the element takes on a pessimistic or negative cast. For example, fire is the element most
at home with intuition, so a lack of fire can manifest as someone whose intuitions tend to be negative; in other
words they are prone to a world view that expects dreadful things to happen. It is ideal for the writer of lurid horror
and crime stories.
Perhaps it is because we humans are all struggling towards wholeness, but we tend to either ‘marry’ or work with
any strong elemental (or other) lacks in our horoscope. Thus, the person who lacks air may choose partners whose

<<<PAGE 30>>>
charts are dominated by the air element, or they may work as counsellors or librarians. These are the individuals
who endlessly collect books and maps. Whatever the so-called ‘missing’ element, we access it from somewhere. It
is not only the number of planets in a given element which has to be considered but where the planets are falling.
One might, for instance, have four planets in water in the Seventh House (the house of partners) but not seem
watery at all. In that instance, it is the partner who will carry and manifest the water element.
In practice, a lack of an element can manifest in a vast number of different ways, depending to a marked degree on
which factors are strong in the horoscope. Many charts will not have any obvious elemental imbalance at all, in
which case the elements are not going to be a way into understanding those horoscopes. Listed below are some of
the psychological principles to associate with missing elements, followed by common manifestations of elemental
lacks.
As a rule the individual has less control over what the given element represents. For example, a lack of water
person may have less control over their feelings. Basically, the missing element just functions more slowly.
As already noted, they often become obsessed with what the missing element signifies – they ‘marry’ it or do ‘it’
for a living. Sometimes an under-emphasis and an over-emphasis on a sign can seem to manifest very similarly,
even if it is only at first glance.
Individuals often express the missing element in quite a childlike, unsophisticated and innocent way. For example,
a lack of earth person may have no embarrassment about revealing their body, and may be seemingly unaware of
the effect their semi-naked body is having on others.
Individuals can be very sensitive and ‘touchy’ with respect to what their missing element signifies. So, those with
air under-emphasized may think others underestimate their brainpower, missing water may have a horror of being
considered insensitive, and so on.
Because of this sensitivity, the individual often seeks to overcompensate; the lack of water person may send more
flowers and thank-you cards, for instance, and the lack of air person may be a great collector of qualifications or
books.
On another level, they tend to undervalue what the given element signifies and there is often an emotional charge
around the difficult area, or a negative interpretation of others who appear to be sophisticated in that area. Thus,
the lack of air person may have a dislike of ‘intellectuals’, the lack of water a suspicion concerning anyone who is
‘too emotional’ or ‘sweet’. The lack of earth may accuse others of being too materialistic or dislike what they
consider to be undue vanity in others. Finally, a person who lacks fire may dislike the world’s gamblers or those
who appear to get through life just trusting to luck.
What Constitutes an Elemental Lack?
There are no hard and fast rules as to what constitutes an elemental lack. Basically if something is not obvious then
it is probably better to ignore it. Vast swathes of the population do not have strong elemental imbalances and, when
looking at such horoscopes, the best bet is to move on and concentrate on other chart factors that are obvious. The
important point to bear in mind, however, is that all planets are not created equal when it comes to assessing
elemental strength in the chart. Much less emphasis should be given to the element in which the outer planets are
found, for instance. After all, Pluto may be in a sign for thirty years and Uranus and Neptune are each in a sign for
seven and fourteen years respectively. Similarly, Jupiter and Saturn need to be given much less weight than the
personal planets.
What about Angles and Houses?
Like the other personal planets, and especially the Sun, Moon and Ascendant ruler, the Ascendant sign itself can be
weighted fairly strongly in terms of assessing elemental preponderance, whereas the MC should probably be
ignored from an elemental point of view, as it is not really such a personal point in the chart. However, it
sometimes occurs that an individual has no planets in a particular element although that element is found on the
Ascendant or MC. In my view, when an element is found on the Ascendant but scarcely anywhere else, the issue is
that the individual still lacks the element but has some awareness of the lack and often accesses the element
through the medium of the sign which is rising. Or someone may have no earthy planets, for instance, but have
packed earth houses (Second, Sixth, Tenth). In this example, the individual will usually work with the earthy lack

<<<PAGE 31>>>
in their professional activities. The same would apply if the ‘missing’ element is found on the MC but nowhere
else, an example of this being the horoscope for Marilyn Monroe.² Marilyn had no planets in earth, other than
Chiron, but did have Taurus on her MC. Her career featured her looks and body a great deal, and to an extent her
physicality is what she is famous for. However, her psychological make-up had all the hallmarks of an earthy lack.
Absence of Planets in Fire
While a lack of fire can sometimes manifest as a lack of drive and ‘oomph’ (depending on what the fiery planets –
Sun, Mars and Jupiter – are up to in the chart), the more common difficulties concern accessing trust and faith.
Faith and confidence in oneself, and in life itself, can be elusive. It is not easy for those who lack fire to access the
childlike knowledge that things will ‘turn out all right in the end’. The intuitions and hunches of the individual
lacking fire tend to be negative. This may manifest as frequent feelings that something terrible is going to happen,
such as dramatic ‘something is out to get me’ imaginings of assaults, robberies, murders and road traffic accidents.
Superstition is another common manifestation. Many people consult the church, astrologers and clairvoyants (or
take up these subjects) because of a lack of fire; they think if they know the worst, they can prepare for it! They
can be slow too to realize that their fate, to a large extent, lies in their own hands. Subjects that defy easy
explanation are ideal for the individual lacking fire. Subjects such as astrology and tarot can be beneficial because
they open up the notion of possibility. Any kind of play and fun situations are also ideal as the ability to ‘let go’ can
be elusive for some with the fire signs untenanted.
Absence of Planets in Earth
Difficulty with the earth element often manifests as an individual being out of touch with their body, with money
or with ‘things’. Equally the individual may be over-delighted with the earthy world and many have a strong, if
naïve, appreciation of nature and the natural world. There can be fascination with the body and a childlike need to
exhibit it, thus models, people who wear little or too tight clothing, even people who frequent nudist colonies, may
all have a lack of planets in earth. Hypochondria can be another manifestation; the individual wonders if they have
a terminal illness with each passing pain, whereas it is more likely that they simply forgot to stop for lunch! A lack
of earth can also sometimes contribute to addictive personality types, as those with a weakness here often have
difficulty in appreciating when enough is enough or knowing when to stop. An emphasized Saturn in the chart will
decrease the chance of any addictive tendency, while a strong Neptune may increase it. Clumsiness, losing things
or getting into debt are other possibilities with a lack of earth. Suggested therapy for those lacking earth can be
anything physical such as gardening, yoga, massage or simple, physical exercises; anything that will help the
individual to realize that the body isn’t alien or separate.
Absence of Planets in Air
The main problem here can be in seeing the implications of one’s actions and the actions of others. Being able to
take an overview of a situation can be elusive too, and this can be problematic because glimpsing the larger picture
enables us to keep things in perspective. Seeing our own needs in the context of the needs of others is another
offshoot of being able to grasp the wider picture. Thus, individuals lacking in air may have difficulty in co-
operating and compromising with others, and with behaving in a reasonable way. They may not be able to distance
themselves from their problems and may be prone to wallowing (especially if the chart is watery) in their pain. For
some, the prospect of meeting new people and adjusting to new situations can be anxiety-making, so much so that
making life changes may not come easily. There may be a tendency to think the worst and to be something of an
Eeyore or ‘voice of doom’. A tendency to worry is the norm here. As a rule, a lack of air by no means diminishes
the intellectual capacity or ability to think (for example, Einstein lacked air), but it can give rise to a lack of
confidence in communicative and learning situations. Some will be easily influenced by the opinions of others.
Missing air people often like maps and subjects that provide some kind of map for living; subjects such as
psychology or astrology are ideal here as they can help increase a sense of objectivity and perspective.
Absence of Planets in Water
The main difficulty in having a lack of water can be in processing feelings. A minority who lack water or who have
difficulty with the element may be completely out of touch with their feelings to the point of being downright

<<<PAGE 32>>>
lacking in empathy. In these instances, the feeling realm is felt to be so painful that feelings have become well and
truly suppressed, usually due to early traumatic experiences. More frequently, though, the difficulty is not that the
feelings aren’t there – they may exist in abundance – but the individual has a less sophisticated relationship with
them and less control over them. Rather like a tap when the washer needs replacing, feelings come and go willy-
nilly. A lack of water can manifest as someone who is super-sensitive: after an argument with a loved one, for
instance, they might believe that the spat spells the end of the relationship, rather than just the fact they have had a
tiff. Thus, mismanaged water can be touchy and defensive and feel emotionally raw. There is often a proneness to
what might be called the ‘grand passion’ – periodically becoming so emotionally attached to someone that the
individual feels as if they are drowning in feelings. People who lack water often express feelings in a sentimental
way and are attracted to the more sloppy or childish expression of feelings. Various art forms such as music and
painting are useful to those lacking water as they provide an outlet for the expression of feelings. And almost any
situations involving people have the same potential.

<<<PAGE 33>>>
The Modes (or Qualities or Quadruplicities)
As well as being divided into the four elements, the signs of the zodiac are also classified into three groups of four
signs, known as the quadruplicities, modes or qualities.
FIRE
EARTH
AIR
WATER
CARDINAL
Aries
Capricorn
Libra
Cancer
FIXED
Leo
Taurus
Aquarius
Scorpio
MUTABLE
Sagittarius
Virgo
Gemini
Pisces

<<<PAGE 34>>>
As with the elements, an understanding of the quadruplicities is central to a good understanding of the horoscope.
As well as helping us to understand the zodiac signs, any imbalances in terms of the modes usually gives clues as
to how the individual both views and deals with conflict. Given that life itself is about conflict, we may as well say
that the modes have much to tell us about how we deal with life itself. All twelve signs exist in each chart and most
horoscopes will seem to have a fair balance between the modes, but some will obviously show a significant
preponderance or lack, which, when it occurs, can be central to an understanding of the chart overall. More to the
point, it is estimated that 40% of charts will have at least one T-square configuration (see page 228) and 5% of
charts will have a Grand Cross (see page 229).³ The way into the first steps of understanding how a given T-square
or Grand Cross will operate is through careful consideration of the mode in which the configuration falls.
Cardinality – Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn
The Sun’s entry into each of the cardinal signs marks the beginning of the seasons for both Northern and Southern
Hemispheres (albeit with different seasons), and the qualities of beginnings, fresh starts and change are strongly
associated with cardinality. Having said that, this initiatory quality may sometimes be less obvious where the
individual signs themselves are concerned. Aries is certainly concerned with pushing forward but Cancer can
appear timid and Libra is characterized by indecision. However, each sign can be initiatory in its own particular
fields. The word ‘cardinal’ comes from the Latin word cardo meaning ‘upon which life hinges’. In the same way
the cardinal signs concern themselves with the central conflicts and issues of life. The conflicts are those everyday
pulls upon our time, interests and resources on which, for many people, life does indeed hinge: how to forge ahead,
be a pioneer, do one’s own thing (Aries), while honouring the need to co-operate and unite with another (Libra),
and at the same time acknowledging the need to be established and respected in the world, to have status and a
career (Capricorn), versus the need for home, familiarity, protection (Cancer), or even the needs and demands of
our parents or of being a parent (Cancer and Capricorn).
People who vibrate strongly to cardinality tend to see conflict as being something external to themselves rather
than as a reflection of something which is going on within them. Their energies are taken up with meeting the
challenges presented by the outer world and perhaps by seeking to conquer them. The cardinal type doesn’t stick in
ruts; if unhappy with a situation they go on to pastures new. Keen for action, people who vibrate strongly to
cardinality (especially Aries) are not afraid to get things going and to roll up their sleeves. The problem with an
overdose of cardinality can be the tendency to create a crisis if one doesn’t already exist. Initiatory, pro-active and
opportunistic, there can be a lot of drive and dynamism here with a corresponding dislike of restriction. A strongly
cardinal type will not like to be hampered by restraints imposed by others or by circumstance, and often they will
feel more comfortable being in charge. Cardinal types like to run things, to be in the driving seat – even before
they have learned to drive. This is especially obvious in those with cardinal T-squares, and more especially Grand
Crosses, who can suffer greatly from frustration, so urgent is the need to do their own thing in their own way.
Suffering from overdrive and often an over-the-top competitive spirit, they will often be anti-establishment and
anti the usual way of doing things. Poor planning is another feature of this action-at-any-price type. Thus, direct
head-on confrontations with others are likely. Poise, calmness and some ability to accept the limitations both of
oneself and others need to be cultivated.
From the health/body perspective, the cardinal signs can be associated with the onset of illness and acute
conditions which invite swift intervention from health care practitioners. Acute situations left unattended are self-
limiting; the organism will either recover (usually) and grow stronger, or will die. Acute disease is less observable
in Western society these days as symptoms tend to be suppressed with antibiotics, rather than allowed to work their
way through the system.
Well developed
Overdeveloped
U
• Able to start things
• Always starting things – possibly a difficulty in completing
•

<<<PAGE 35>>>
• Self-motivated • Goal-orientated
• Finds co-operating with others difficult, because so bent on the given goal
•
• Good in crisis
• Creates crisis and stirs up problems
•
• In touch with the ‘here and now’
• Concerned only with ‘here and now’ issues
•

<<<PAGE 36>>>
Fixity – Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius
The notion of attachment is central to an understanding of the fixed perspective: Taurus can be overly attached to
the material world and to trusting only what is tangible, Leo’s attachment is to pride, Scorpio’s to feelings and
Aquarius’s to ideas.
Fixity provides persistence, stability, constancy, reliability and thus the capacity for endurance. Endurance because
the fixed type can put up with situations that cardinal or mutable types would find intolerable. Fixed types are the
ones you want with you over the long haul, the concentrated kind of energy which is more akin to a cart-horse than
a thoroughbred, highly-strung racehorse. On the down side, fixity tends to get stuck in ruts or stalemate situations.
Letting go, whether of people, feelings, things or ideas, does not come easily to those overly developed in this
area.
Fixity has great resistance to change and to being pushed, pulled or coerced. The meaning is akin to those times
which mark the middle of the seasons, when change seems far off, for example, in high summer when spring is
long gone and before there is even a hint of autumn in the air. The fixed time is a time for establishing, for making
secure and building upon what cardinality started. The energy is concentrated, intense and prolonged. To fix
something is to mend it and the fixed types are the great sustainers and preservers of the status quo. There is also
the notion of being ‘in a fix’ where it seems as if movement in any direction is impossible. Those with a fixed T-
square or more especially a Grand Cross can be especially unyielding and stubborn or particularly determined and
persistent, depending on one’s point of view. A ‘might makes right’ attitude can be the downfall of this type, who
needs to learn to cultivate flexibility.
From the health/body perspective, fixity can be associated with chronic disease: diseases that take years to
develop, which will slow the individual down, go on forever and simply have to be endured. Slow poisoning of the
body and a holding on to pain are also fixed characteristics.
Well developed
Overdeveloped
Underdeveloped
• Determined and persistent
• Stubborn, obstinate and inflexible
• Lacking strength and s
• Self-willed
• Overly wilful
• Lack of willpower
• Constant, reliable and loyal
• Rigid, implacable and unable to adapt
• Inconstant and irresolu
• Sticks at it • Resistant to change
• Sticks in ruts • Inert, stuck
• Sticks at nothing
• Enormous energy … once it gets going
• Tends to conserve energy (a pressure cooker)
• Blown every which w

<<<PAGE 37>>>
Mutability - Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces
The mutable signs equate with the end of the seasons, for example when summer is turning to autumn. Not
surprisingly, therefore, those people who vibrate strongly to this mode are good at coping with uncertainty and
shifting goalposts. They are able to live in a state of flux and transition, always ready to respond to whatever is
required of them. Not expecting (or even necessarily wanting) anything to be permanent, the mutable signs all
have some tendency towards restlessness.
All the mutable signs are concerned with ideas (Gemini and Virgo) or beliefs (Sagittarius and Pisces), and since
each has some tendency to experience life vicariously, to read about it, to talk about it or to philosophize about it,
the challenge of the mutable type can sometimes be to actually live life. These are the signs that are concerned
with their relationship to life itself, and are neither goal-orientated nor into power. Thus, although commitment-
shy, the mutable type can be the easiest to get along with, as they don’t tread so much on others’ toes. The mutable
types can hang on in there if they are interested; otherwise, forever restless, they move on. And when faced with
conflict, discord or confrontation, there is a strong tendency to avoid it by simply changing direction. The
establishment of goals and the achievement of them can therefore be particularly elusive, especially if a T-square
or Grand Cross is involved. And those with mutable T-squares and Grand Crosses are particularly prone to anxiety,
restlessness and inconsistency. To be productive, a modicum of self-discipline is essential here, as is the ability to
set and keep to realistic goals. With mutable types there is not the urge to get to the root of things or put up with
them (as with fixity), or to get on top of them (cardinality), but mutability is very gifted at adapting to
circumstance. The mutable signs are sometimes called the ‘common’ signs and surely the reason for this is that the
usual or common way of dealing with life is for us to adapt to it. The uncommon person is the person who gets the
world to bend to them.
From a health perspective, as elsewhere, the main problem with the mutable signs can be a lack of resistance.
These are the types who pick up every sneeze that is going and get anxious whenever a decision or commitment is
required of them.
Well developed
Overdeveloped
Un
• Adaptable and flexible
• Overly yielding and malleable
• U
• Able to co-exist with each and every circumstance
• Too easily side-tracked
• Inclusive in orientation
• Unable to exclude
• Ability to adjust
• Adjusts inappropriately – shifts when should hold firm
• U
• Curious, searching
• Without a goal, directionless
• U
• Scattered. Anxious
• N

<<<PAGE 38>>>
Notes – Chapter 2: Elements and Modes
1. Suggested further reading: Astrology, Psychology and the Four Elements, Stephen Arroyo, CRCS Publications,
1975.
2. Marilyn Monroe: 1 June 1926, 9:30 a.m. PST, Los Angeles, California (34N03, 118W15). Source: Birth
certificate.
3. Dean, Geoffrey, and Mather, Arthur, Recent Advances in Natal Astrology, The Astrological Association, 1977.

<<<PAGE 39>>>
OceanofPDF.com

<<<PAGE 40>>>
Chapter 3
The Zodiac Signs
The twelve signs of the zodiac can be described as ‘ways of being’ or types
of energy. Most people are familiar with their Sun sign, but actually each
planet is modified in its expression by the zodiac sign in which it is found.
Similarly the activities of each house in a horoscope are modified by the
sign on its cusp.
It is important to remember that the signs are not as important as Sun sign
books and newspaper columns would have us believe. The planets, and the
relationships between the planets and angles, are far more important in
chart interpretation than signs. The signs are like adjectives, the words that
describe, whereas the planets are the nouns.
Symbols and Glyphs
Each of the twelve signs has a symbol attached to it: e.g. Aries is the Ram,
Taurus is the Bull, and so on. Basically, symbols are compressed and
concentrated carriers of meaning. Each sign, like each planet, has a glyph, a
pictorial representation to convey quickly the given symbol and a whole
host of shorthand meanings and associations. Society as a whole is full of
logos – instantly recognizable images – which convey information and
feelings quickly and efficiently to people whose language may not even be
the same. In the same way that we learn the common language of road
signs, we can learn the astrological symbols (or glyphs) and use them as a
shorthand.
The Signs as Developmental Phases

<<<PAGE 41>>>
The signs can be read as a developmental story. For instance, one common
story goes along the lines that Aries pioneered the land, Taurus built on it,
Gemini went to meet the neighbours, Cancer started a family, and so on. In
fact, one could come up with a range of stories while travelling through the
zodiac. The signs grow more complex as one travels through them. At Aries
we are simply at the embryonic ‘I’ stage of development, but travelling
through all twelve we learn about ourselves, about relating to others, and
about society and the universe as a whole. By the time we arrive at Pisces,
more spiritual dimensions are in the frame.
Another significant point about the order of the signs is that each sign reacts
against its predecessor, attempting to compensate for any lacks or extremes
that the previous sign brought with it.
Sign Groupings
As we have already seen, the signs can be grouped in terms of their element
or mode. Dividing signs in other ways can also be helpful to their
understanding and, as with elemental or modal imbalances, can sometimes
provide an important ‘in’ into understanding a horoscope.
The twelve signs neatly fall into three sectors of four signs. The first sector,
comprising the first four signs (Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer), is
concerned with the basics of life, what might be termed fundamental or
survival needs. The next four signs (Leo, Virgo, Libra and Scorpio) venture
into more social and relationship issues, while the last four signs
(Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces) concern themselves with
collective or universal matters and, in the case of Pisces, the spiritual realm.
Sometimes a horoscope has an emphasis or under-emphasis on one of these
three groupings and this can provide the all-important entry into
understanding what the chart and individual are about. For instance, where
there are no planets in the first four signs (or, if one is using this idea with
the houses, the first four houses), the individual may put their own personal
needs aside or be out of touch with them. Where there are no planets in the
last four signs (or houses), the person may ignore some of the larger
questions of life or the wider world. The meanings of the various
permutations should be fairly obvious. Not too much stress should be laid

<<<PAGE 42>>>
on this idea, unless, as usual, it is also borne out by other factors. For
instance, if the houses tenanted also reflect similar ideas to the signs that are
tenanted (e.g. no planets situated in the last four signs and no planets in the
last four houses either), this could be taken as being significant.
Sections on the Body
Health comments must not be taken too seriously as all twelve signs do
appear in every horoscope and, as with everything, the whole chart has to
be considered and each individual factor appropriately weighted to assess
its importance (or lack of). In general terms, though, health comments
based on signs (which can only ever be vague) apply not only to your Sun
sign but also to the sign on your Sixth House cusp and possibly your
ascending sign, too. Note that the sign position of Saturn is often a weak
area of the body.
Points to Consider When Using this Section
Learning about the signs should help you to interpret the various planets
and angles in a horoscope from the point of view of their sign. The
cookbook sections under each planet will also help you do this.
As there has been so much written on Sun signs, they have not been
emphasized in this book but this section should help you to understand the
main Sun sign characteristics. Just remember that Sun signs are hugely
over-emphasized in the press, and that our Sun describes more what we are
striving to become than a set of characteristics that are already completely
ours.
Every sign is contained within each horoscope somewhere; you can tell in
which area(s) of life you are at your most Taurean or Geminian, for
instance, by looking for the houses (and cusps) where those signs are to be
found. Don’t forget that the ruler of the house cusp is crucial and will give
you more information. This is explained in more detail on pages 300–1.

<<<PAGE 43>>>
Aries
Element: Fire
Mode: Cardinal
Ruler: Mars
The Symbol and Glyph
The Ram is the symbol for Aries and the glyph of the sign can be
interpreted as being the horns and nose of the male sheep; the so-called
battering ram. The beginning of Aries starts with the first day of spring (in
the Northern Hemisphere), the time of new beginnings. Aries rules the head
and the glyph also resembles the eyebrows and nose.
General Characteristics
As the first sign of the zodiac, Aries is concerned with new beginnings.
Being first is a key to much of the psychological traits of the sign and also
to its vulnerability and naïveté. Any planet in Aries is usually affected with
this ‘being first’ and competitive quality. But despite the theme of being
first, many an Aries type, in my experience, appears to be the great copier
of the zodiac: if you have got it then Aries wants it. Aries will pick up an
idea, run with it and become famous for it as if no one had ever thought of
it before. Aries can be like a child revelling enthusiastically in the discovery
of something, joyfully unaware that countless others have previously made
the same discovery.
Pioneers have courage in embarking into the unknown. However, doing
things for the first time (or, never having asked, believing them to be
for the first time) usually means that one is ill-prepared. Little wonder

<<<PAGE 44>>>
that the sign is associated with traits such as fervour, enthusiasm,
immaturity and naïveté and also with impetuosity, foolhardiness and
recklessness. These are qualities that go with youth, vitality and the
pioneering spirit. They also on occasion go with mischief-making and
generally getting oneself into hot water. Mythical stories of
swashbuckling heroes and knights on white chargers rescuing damsels
in distress (e.g. Robin Hood) all have an Arien ring to them. Having
said that, it should be added that planets in Aries can represent either
the rescuer (Robin) or the rescued (Maid Marian), and not necessarily
along gender lines.
Aries needs action; a pro-active sign, it isn’t Aries’ style to idly sit around
waiting for something to happen. Aries meets life head-on. Having a cause
of some kind brings out the best of the sign, and by that I mean something
or someone to fight for or, at least, something to do. Aries is good in
situations which require quick decision-making or have a trouble-shooting
aspect to them. Anything which has the aspect of chase or conquest is also
ideal. Activities that require reflection, self-doubt or compromise, on the
other hand, will often fall way outside the typical Arien league.
The Aries quality can be arrogant, impulsive, impatient and sometimes
downright reckless, but the vitality and enthusiasm of the sign can do much
to spur others into action. Planets in Aries can also spur other parts of the
horoscope into action. On the other hand, those who vibrate strongly to the
sign can be overly self-centred and opportunistic, and the often seemingly
naïve way of pushing themselves forward can be antisocial and may offend
more subtle types. The ram is honest and direct in its dealings – there is no
going round the houses. It may not be easy for the strongly Arien person to
see another’s point of view; co-operation doesn’t come easily to those who
vibrate to Aries, but the real weakness of the sign stems from the inability to
separate oneself from what is going on and thus a tendency to take
everything personally.
Sun and Moon Ariens are often accused, sometimes quite justifiably, of
being bossy, but the sign is not really into power or even into leadership for
its own sake. It is just that Aries is self-motivated and doesn’t need or seek
the approval, permission or co-operation of others. Typically, planets in
Aries (and the Arien type generally) just want to do things in their own
way; that is, not to be hampered, constrained or fettered by anyone or even

<<<PAGE 45>>>
by the energies described by other chart factors. Planets in Aries (in hard
aspect) will often give rise to a feeling of frustration. This is sometimes
because there can be a ‘taking over’ quality and a tendency to butt in
uninvited in those with this sign strong. Others may not take kindly to such
interference and may make efforts to block it. This pushiness is largely
because of the need for action and the general impatience at the perceived
slow pace of life and the slow pace of others. Aries hates sitting round while
others are making decisions or spending too much time in preparing to act.
Thus, Aries types make bad subordinates and are not usually good as team
players either for, again, they tend to find others far too slow. Aries is
wonderful at just doing, getting on with it, whatever the project in hand
actually is, but the type tends to lack staying power. The purpose of Aries is
to initiate, not necessarily to complete.
Aries thrives best on challenge but some degree of preparedness will always
increase the chances of success in any undertaking. And understanding that
results cannot always be quick will limit the feelings of frustration when
obstacles do occur. As with Mars, the ruler of Aries, those with the Sun or
Moon in Aries can be prone in particular to whining when things do not go
as they want. Indeed, the phrase ‘I want’ is traditionally a key phrase of this
sign. ‘I want it now’ might be more accurate. I am indebted to the astrologer
John Alexander for his very accurate observation that the Sun in Aries
person often reports feeling abandoned or, at least, left out of things. This
can of course result from the difficulty that Aries can have in co-operating.
For instance, imagine the Arien whose choice of dinner is a Mexican take-
out while all his friends want to dine at the local Chinese. He is then
nonplussed when they all leave him for noodles and sweet and sour! But the
feeling of being left out can also be a reflection of how much Aries wants to
be in the thick of whatever is going on. It is not that he is left out any more
than anyone else, merely that he wants to be included more.
The Wider World
Countries who have historically been aggressors and colonizers often
vibrate to Aries. England would be one example (but see also Capricorn). I
have noted that people from overseas who settle in England often have

<<<PAGE 46>>>
Aries strong in their charts. In the animal world, male sheep and any
animals that tend to ‘lock horns’ over matters of territory or courtship can
be viewed as Arien. The robin with its territorial attitude, cheeky ways
(always bravely waiting while the bird table is being restocked) and red
breast also has a touch of the Ram about it.
Colours/Taste/Style
Red for ‘go’ is the classic Aries colour. But black and white also belong
here, for those who vibrate strongly to this sign tend to see things in black
and white terms. Typically, Aries makes strong statements in matters of
taste: perhaps the wearing of bold colours, the latest hairstyle or the shortest
hem-lines. Flamboyant or not, Aries is the sign that likes hats. This can even
be seen in non-Aries types when their progressed Sun or Moon enters the
sign. More specifically, those with natal Sun conjunct natal Mercury in
Aries particularly like wearing hats.
The Body
Aries holds dominion over the head, and not only has a propensity for many
head-related disorders (headaches, migraine, concussion, neuralgia) but
many ‘head’ words can be appropriate for the sign. The Arien principle can
be impulsive and reckless; success only comes about when the thinking
process is engaged first. In short, Aries needs to ‘use its head’. Failure to
think first can make those who vibrate strongly to this sign rather accident-
prone. On a physical level, injuries to the head and eyes are likely. Many
Ariens have a prominent nose (or eyebrows and nose) or some kind of
facial scar. Those with Sun in Aries, especially, are often well-known
among their friends for gazing very directly at you or, in shyer types, for not
being able to look you in the eye when talking.
Planets in Aries

<<<PAGE 47>>>
Planets here are usually speeded up and operate in a more impulsive,
adventurous, impetuous, decisive or courageous way, but the action
associated with the planet may only be short-lived. The quality of daring
can be added to the psychological traits associated with the given planet.
Any planets here will also take on a competitive edge. (Note that Saturn in
Aries may be frightened of competition, both fearful of coming first and
fearful of not coming first.)
Aries on a House Cusp
This shows the area of life where we may show daring. Where we may be
willing to bravely start anew. Where we may be competitive. Here, we may
be eager for action – and possibly able to spur others into action. This area
could be where we may be able to say ‘I’m going do what I want to do,
when I want to do it’ – an area where we act first and think later. The Aries
house may act as a launch pad or starting point for many of the individual’s
activities. For instance, Aries on the Seventh House cusp may imply that it
is one’s partner, or the requirements of partnership, that spurs one into
action.

<<<PAGE 48>>>
Taurus
Element: Earth
Mode: Fixed
Ruler: Venus
The Symbol and Glyph
The glyph can be taken to represent the head and horns of the Bull, the
Taurean symbol. The bull conjures up a picture of enormous strength: an
animal slow to move but a force to be reckoned with when aroused. The
bull is a living bulwark, a rampart, a barricade, simply by virtue of its size
and strength. The bull is a fertile animal but the ‘reined in bull’, the Ox (a
mature castrated male), is capable of carrying the heaviest of loads without
buckling. Baseball teams often call themselves ‘Bulls’ (e.g. the Chicago
Bulls) to indicate the strength and endurance of the team. Bulls are also
taken to symbolize fertility and some have even viewed the Taurean glyph
as depicting fallopian tubes leading into the uterus.
General Characteristics
If it was the job of Aries to start things, then the tasks of sustaining, taking
root and accumulating fall to Taurus. Whereas Aries wanted ‘to do’, Taurus
doesn’t particularly want to do, or want to reflect or want to speculate. The
Taurean impulse is just to be and to have. Taurus seeks to create or acquire
something and then hold on to it. Little wonder therefore that the sign has a
reputation for being possessive.
As well as being patient, placid and calm, Taurus is the most enduring,
persistent, and steadfast of all the signs: an oak tree rather than a willow.

<<<PAGE 49>>>
Oak trees are not as good at bending as willows but it has to be
acknowledged that oak trees are much more satisfying to lean against. And
you can lean against and rely on those whose chart vibrates strongly to
Taurus. Persevering and determined, if not stubborn and obstinate, the Bull
is deliberate and cannot easily be pulled, pushed or coerced into anything
against its will. With some planets in Taurus (e.g. Mars), resistance to
movement and change can sometimes give rise to ‘bullying’ behaviour,
especially in people who have not learned how to get their needs met in
healthier, more conscious ways. As any farmer will testify, under stress
(‘stress’ here might be defined as undue disturbance) even normally placid
cattle can become aggressive, although on the whole one might associate
Taurus with more passive aggression.
While not the most imaginative sign, Taurus is blessed with realism and
common sense. Those with many planets here want an unchanging life and
seek to preserve the status quo and stability in almost all areas. Many
decisions, whether or not to do something, stem consciously or
unconsciously from this desire to have a quiet life and basically from a
strong instinct for self-preservation. Taurean philosophy dictates that they
leave well alone – permanently if possible, or at least until, in true bovine
style, they have had the chance to chew things over slowly and carefully.
Thus, all else in the horoscope being equal, the Taurean type doesn’t
interfere with (or even have an opinion about) the affairs of others. Equally,
Taurus doesn’t like to be interfered with themselves.
Practical in orientation and disliking of the purely theoretical, Taurus
doesn’t easily believe in anything that can’t be seen or touched. Taurus
likes the simple life and, indeed, in most matters prefers simplicity.
Taurus doesn’t cope well with complexity or complex types of people.
Pragmatic and down-to-earth, those who vibrate strongly to this sign
don’t like things unnecessarily ‘wrapped up’. They can see through
bullshit. Indeed, this is typical Taurean language, so very often
appreciative of lavatory humour.
The concern of Taurus is with producing and building something tangible.
Building is undoubtedly a keyword to use with respect to any planet found
in this sign. There can be a capacity for building slowly upon previous
efforts and the building-block approach to life has a slow-but-steady aspect
to it which is distinctly Taurean. This considered approach can often bring

<<<PAGE 50>>>
in real wealth in the longer term. An educational role is not the most
obvious one for the typical Bull but if there is a need to teach it will be done
in a clear, step-by-step, keep-it-simple, building blocks kind of way.
The Bull is also very concerned with security and stability. For those with a
Taurean emphasis in the chart, it is the basics of life – home, food and
physical security – that must not be endangered. Thus, Taurus will not
easily do anything that might threaten their physical or material security and
can appear to be rather plodding and stick-in-the-mud to more carefree,
adventurous types.
Basically, Taurus is stoical. Not easily ruffled, those with an emphasis here
may seem to be unaffected by grief or joy, pain or pleasure. This is because
of an ability to calmly accept everything that happens as the unavoidable
result of the natural order of things. Thus, Taurus, perhaps more than any
other sign, is in touch with nature. There is usually also an appreciation of
nature’s bounty, an appreciation of the beauty and riches of the land and of
the food it produces. In life and in art, this contributes to a sense of
proportion. Fundamentally, the rhythms of nature are unchanging, which
may be another reason why Taurus feels so at home with the natural world.
Being in touch with nature also includes being in touch with the body: its
needs and its skills. As well as being a very earthy and   sign, the senses
tend to be highly developed – taste, smell and touch in particular. The
strong sense of touch, texture and form found with a variety of placements
in Taurus are ideal for those who work in occupations dealing with textiles.
Ideal too for anyone whose life involves tactile skills – massage,
aromatherapy or healing, for instance. Construction, musical, agricultural
and horticultural trades are also potentially Taurean. Music is applicable
because Taurus is so good with all things oral – singing as well as eating!
The vulnerability of some with Taurus emphasized in their chart can lie in
the tendency to be addicted to physical comforts and the good life. Taurus
can be a self-indulgent and lazy sign, prone to inertia and stagnation, to
conserving energy rather than using it.
With its realistic two (four?) feet on the ground and strong sense of
proportion, Taurus is perhaps one of the sanest signs of the zodiac.
Emotionally, sexually and in matters requiring anger management, the type
is characterized by quiet resistance, slow arousal and considerable
endurance. The down-to-earth quality of the sign also contributes to its

<<<PAGE 51>>>
sense of humour as much laughter is gleaned from the more basic attributes
of human nature. Thus, Taurean humour tends to be simple and earthy
unless other parts of the horoscope predominate.
Staunch might be another keyword for the sign. Like the Bull, Taurus
is so firm and steadfast, it checks the flow of whatever comes into its
path. Therefore, Taurean energy can allay anxiety and protect, but
equally it can block change and progress.
The Wider World
Although Sagittarius is traditionally associated with Spain, I associate that
country with Taurus. This is partly through experience with clients and
Spanish news stories but also because Spain is a country that is fertile, dry
and famed as the land of bullfighting. The country is home to many an
earthy peasant who, when you get to know them, is often surprisingly well-
off. Cattle (especially bulls!) and potentially all farm animals including pigs
are reminiscent of Taurus. In other words, they are animals that get
converted to food! Note that the police (which I believe comes under this
sign) are often referred to as ‘pigs’. Taurus would also apply to PC Plod.
Detectives come under the umbrella of the opposite sign, Scorpio. Ireland is
another country that has traditionally been associated with Taurus, an
attribution that I can neither confirm or deny but which seems reasonable
given the highly rural nature of that country.
Colours/Taste/Style
Taurus is usually associated with pastel shades or colours associated with
nature. Pale pink, green and blue-green sometimes feature. There can be a
liking for floral patterns and those who vibrate strongly to the sign may be
quite traditional in their tastes. Whatever the preferred colours, Taurus is
always very hot on texture – there will invariably be a liking for fabrics that
feel good (e.g. velvet or silk) in those with this sign strongly emphasized.

<<<PAGE 52>>>
The Body
The Taurean bodily terrain is the neck, including the larynx and thyroid.
The neck of the Taurus type is often noticeable for its long, slender beauty
or, conversely, its thickness. Taurus is the sign to be associated with a
beautiful voice, and in terms of health may be prone to sore throats, and
pain and stiffness in the neck.
Planets in Taurus
Planets in Taurus tend to operate more slowly, simply and often more
cautiously than in other signs. Taurus will add a traditional and usually a
stable quality to the psychology of the given planet, the affairs of which
may also be tinged by matters of money or beauty. Or at least tinged with
the notion of ownership.
Taurus on a House Cusp
In this house, one might want value for money. For example, one woman
with Taurus on the Second House cusp told me she bought designer clothes
but only in the sales! In our Taurean house we may stick to what is tried and
tested, be more traditional, be down-to-earth or motivated by matters of
self-preservation. Here, perhaps, we may be known for being realistic and
reliable. Sometimes we may be possessive in this area of life. For example,
Taurus on the Seventh House cusp might imply either that one may have a
tendency to attract possessive partners or that one might be possessive of
one’s own partner.

<<<PAGE 53>>>
Gemini
Element: Air
Mode: Mutable
Ruler: Mercury
The Symbol and Glyph
Two twin pillars depicted by vertical lines joined at top and bottom signify
the Twins, and also the notion of duality. In common parlance, we have the
expression ‘from pillar to post’ which captures the spirit of Gemini,
meaning moving hither and thither; going to and fro; from one place or
predicament to another; travelling backwards and forwards.
General Characteristics
One of the key principles of Gemini is that of connection. This super-
networking sign is concerned with connecting people, places, ideas and all
else; its purpose is concerned with association and communication.
Gemini’s job is to gather information and then process and distribute it. It is
left to Sagittarius (Gemini’s opposite sign) to consider what the information
might mean and to the other Mercury-ruled sign, Virgo, to decide whether
the information is useful or not and to discard it if it isn’t. Gemini’s task is
merely to gather information and disseminate it. Hence Gemini is the sign
of both the scholar and the gossip. Each gathers information and each
conveys it to others. Gathering facts requires an open attitude. Any kind of
censorship on information will stop it moving freely. Basically, too strong a
sense of right or wrong limits where one can go. Little wonder, then, that
Gemini is essentially an amoral sign and those who vibrate strongly to it are

<<<PAGE 54>>>
mentally agile, curious and flexible. Curiosity is perhaps the dominant trait
here.
Versatile, flexible and adaptable and very much liking variety and diversity,
Gemini seeks an infinite variety of tasks and as many different ways as
possible of carrying out the given assignment (unlike Taurus, its
predecessor, which liked to do the same things and in the same way). Thus,
there is an experimental attitude to life with this sign, a tendency to live life
provisionally and to not take things too seriously. Commitmentshy,
whatever the situation, Gemini will choose to keep all possible options
open.
In common with the other mutable signs, Gemini is not goal-orientated.
Goals imply the commitment to cover a long distance, whereas Gemini
prefers short distances and revels in the little deviations and digressions
along the given path. Gemini does cover a lot of ground (perhaps more than
any other sign) but the ground covered is not found in a simple linear
direction, it is more accidental than that. Arguably, true satisfaction in life
comes from experiencing what is to be experienced deeply. One tastes the
flavours more when one chews slowly and carefully, but Gemini’s style is
to hop from flower to flower. This butterfly existence has not only
restlessness but also, very often, dissatisfaction as part of its package. For
this reason, those with a strong emphasis on this dilettante sign can easily
feel that they are missing out in some way, even while actually being at the
very centre of all that is going on.
Gemini is the great cosmic agent, always able to put A in touch with B.
Gemini is able to make a phenomenal number of connections – this is the
sign of networking. There is a need to be ‘in’ on whatever is going on, a
dislike of being excluded, but always the requirement to be able to move
freely within the hub of activity, remaining uncommitted and able to move
or exit if things become too restrictive or heavy. The Gemini type is
essentially a juggler: forever juggling people, time, places and ideas.
A preponderance of planets in Gemini will often lead to a talent with
language and languages. Often too there is a liking and aptitude for games,
especially card games. Cycling, tennis and skateboarding are also often
Geminian pursuits, as are all matters concerned with knowledge or

<<<PAGE 55>>>
communication. Intelligence is not something that can be measured in the
horoscope but commonly those who vibrate strongly to this sign are clever.
At worst, those who vibrate strongly to this easily bored sign may be
flighty, fidgety and fickle. Lacking in both concentration and conviction,
some will appear tricksterish, vacillating and changeable. A strong Saturn or
the presence of fixity in the chart can do much to offset such tendencies.
Both scepticism and gullibility can also be part of the Gemini package, for
arriving at a depth of understanding can be hard. The openness to
everything and inability to exclude information can also lead to difficulties
in decision-making. The typical Gemini is invariably ‘in two minds’ about
most things. Like Janus, the Roman god of gates and doorways, Gemini can
face two ways simultaneously.
At best though, strongly Geminian types are skilful and versatile and able to
turn their hand to anything. Contemporary, always ahead of the game,
sociable and busy, Gemini is an interesting sign. Planets in Gemini may
seek novelty but they may also produce individuals who provide it. It is also
the sign most associated with youth, as typically youngsters want and need
variety and perhaps shouldn’t commit themselves until they have
sufficiently experimented with life. Lifetime youthfulness and a Peter Pan
quality can be especially associated with individuals who have both sides of
the Gemini-Sagittarius polarity emphasized in their horoscopes, especially
where the fire element is also strong and/or the earth element weak.
Although the Third House and Mercury are much stronger indicators, the
part of the horoscope where Gemini is to be found (and planets placed in
the sign) often also contributes information about an individual’s siblings:
the people they are or were, and the nature of the relationship with them.
The Wider World
The insect world in general can be associated with Gemini, especially
flying insects, moths and butterflies. I have noted that transits from, or to,
Mars in Gemini, for instance, often equate with insects that bite or sting,
such as bees and wasps. The monkey family may also owe something to the
sign. Birds renowned for mimicry such as parrots, the crow family and

<<<PAGE 56>>>
mocking birds may also vibrate to Gemini. London, city of commerce and
infinite variety in all things, has for centuries been associated with this sign.
William Lilly’s famous prediction of the Great Fire of London in September
1666 was depicted in a woodcut of the Twins surrounded by flames.
Colours/Taste/Style
This is a contemporary and fashionable sign. The colour associated with
Mercury, the ruler of Gemini, is yellow – a stimulating colour, long
connected with communication and intellectual matters. For this reason the
walls of mental hospitals used to be painted yellow. More importantly,
yellow is a cheerful colour, and certainly Geminian taste veers towards the
bright and the cheerful. Patterns with lines rather than curves may be
favoured. In matters of taste, as elsewhere, Gemini cannot be pinned down,
though there is usually a liking for variety in colours and styles.
The Body
The agility of Gemini can also be physical: Gemini has rulership over the
lungs, arms and hands but, in my experience, also has a connection with all
the limbs in the body. People who have difficulty getting around, for
whatever reason, will usually have this fact partially shown by planets in
the Third House or in Gemini. Gemini is a nervous, worrying sign and this
may be in evidence in those who have a preponderance of planets here. This
is especially the case when something is expected of them. Mercurial types,
including those who vibrate strongly to Gemini, may be more predisposed
to smoking (for starters, there is a need to do something with one’s hands)
or sometimes more ill-disposed to smoking than others. The respiratory
system is a key area for this sign.
Planets in Gemini

<<<PAGE 57>>>
Gemini lightens up – seems to almost add air – to any planet found in the
sign. The qualities of the given planet will not only seem to become lighter
and less serious but also more scattered and difficult to get hold of. With the
exception of Saturn, the attention of the given planet may more easily stray.
Often the issues associated with the planet will be verbalized more. The
individual may want to understand the aspect of themselves described by
the particular planet. Youth will also be added to the equation: for instance,
Venus, and especially Mars, in Gemini can suggest age differences between
lovers.
Gemini on a House Cusp
Gemini on a house cusp always implies dualism: for instance, two
marriages when on the Seventh House, two jobs on the Sixth or Tenth, two
parents sometimes on the Fourth or Tenth, and so on. Siblings will also
often feature in the activities of the given house and there may be links to
schooldays. Activities associated with the given house may become more
diverse and the individual will approach the activities associated with that
house with curiosity and from a rational and cerebral point of view.

<<<PAGE 58>>>
Cancer
Element: Water
Mode: Cardinal
Ruler: Moon
The Symbol and Glyph
The symbol for Cancer is the Crab. The glyph can be taken to depict the
crab’s claws encircling each other in a protective posture. Curiously it also
looks like the number 69 turned on its side. The crab has a hard shell to
protect a soft body and the Cancerian person can also be like this: crusty
and defensive on the outside but soft and squidgy within. The glyph can
also be interpreted as being representative of breasts (a Cancerian part of
the body), or cradling arms, both images reminiscent of the nurturing and
maternal nature of the sign.
General Characteristics
The emphasis for Cancer is on the home, the family and the past – the key
principle being a need to feel safe and a strong urge to belong. Those who
vibrate strongly to the sign often have a great liking for history and
sometimes for antiques. Both history and family provide a feeling of
continuity with all that has gone before. This sense of having a past affords
the individual a feeling of emotional security. The knowledge that they
belong to a family also provides a sense of security, as an important role of
the family unit is to provide a cushion against outside dangers.
Although a cardinal sign, the Cancerian method of initiation is not a
straightforward one. Like the crab, the movement of Cancer tends to be

<<<PAGE 59>>>
oblique, sideways and manoeuvring; Cancer can be skilled at ‘going round
the houses’. Going sideways or retreating into one’s shell can be useful
defensive measures to take when a degree of protection is required, but can
also be ways of avoiding issues that need to be dealt with. And as the crab
has very large claws to hold on tightly when necessary, so too does the
Cancerian type have a tenacious grip.
The oblique, sideways quality associated with this sign can be a way of
dealing with shyness and timidity. Sidling up can feel easier than a head-on
confrontation. Those with a preponderance of planets in Cancer may be
defensive and cagey but can often be very shrewd, too. The shrewdness,
conservative attitude and tendency to let go of nothing often makes for
skills with money and what might be termed ‘good husbandry’. Sometimes
hoarding and penny-pinching go with the territory.
Cancer is noted for its characteristic traits of imagination, sensitivity and
sympathetic understanding. Its energy is soft and yielding and yet
surprisingly defensive. The Cancerian type is very protective; not only self-
protective and protective of their clan but even of their country. Cancer can
be patriotic. Those who vibrate strongly to this sign often feel easily
threatened. There are various ways that might be used to respond to a
supposed threat but often the response is to become touchy, sulky or huffy.
Cancer is a moody sign although, more positively, one might say that it is in
touch with the changeability of the feeling realm. Be that as it may, there
can be a great sensitivity to slights whether these are imagined or real.
The protective, sympathetic quality of the sign goes alongside the strong
urge to mother, to nurture, to care for. Planets here can be useful in both
kinds of nursery: those that are child-based and the horticultural variety.
And there is a strong nest-building propensity with Cancer. Home, the
ultimate place of retreat and safety, is everything. The house position of any
planet in Cancer can show where the individual creates some kind of home-
from-home.
Whereas in many ways Gemini was the sign of the child, being youthful
and innocent and either oblivious to, or not frightened by, the horrors of
life, Cancer is the sign of the mother, who, almost by definition, is always
alive to danger and takes little that happens in life lightly. Hence, in the
same way that the crab has a tough shell to protect a sensitive body, those

<<<PAGE 60>>>
whose charts have a Cancerian emphasis can be rather crusty. In other
words they can be moody, negative and pessimistic. For all that, it should
be added that humour is very much part of the Cancerian picture, partly
because laughter increases a sense of belonging. Aldous Huxley’s theory of
in-group/out-group hostility may be relevant in a discussion of both the sign
of Cancer and a discussion of the nature of humour. Cancer will do
anything for their group; usually jokes are targeted at people who are not
perceived as belonging to their own group. Potentially, therefore, Cancer is
the sign more likely to find it difficult to accommodate foreigners and
foreignness.
Tenacity is another keyword and, reminiscent of the claws of the crab,
this is indeed the most tenacious and potentially clingy of the signs. It is
not easy for Cancer to let go of the past or of family members, or
indeed of anything that provides any kind of support system. Cancer
can cling to people and to things, no matter how old. In some with the
sign emphasized, their tendency to cling to people can result in
possessiveness, a smothering propensity and needlessly fussing over
them.
The sign has an association with memory; not for having a memory for
facts so much as a memory for feelings, such as what happened on holiday
thirty years before. Cancer is a sentimental sign and some with planets here
will have a tendency to collect and hoard. The typical Cancerian type does
not want to forget the past and does not want you to forget it either. Not
only might they cling to you and not let you go, they might actually want
you to cling to them. The need to be needed is very great and, again,
provides a feeling of security. Still on the theme of tenacity, those whose
charts are dominated by the sign are probably, statistically speaking, the
longest living. And this is despite the fact that the disease called cancer has
undoubtedly (in my experience) a strong link with the sign. Readers with
planets in Cancer need not panic when they read this. There are few of us,
in Western society particularly, whose lives have not been touched by the
disease. The area in your chart where the zodiacal sign falls may simply
show through whom and where you come face to face with it. Note that a
study of crustaceans (including crabs) is called carcinology and that the
disease was probably named after the crab because of the tenacious way in
which it can cling. The Latin word cancer literally means ‘crab’.
